

















Lecture 1		Introduction to the internal market –
Fiscal Restrictions 

MAIN READING

Craig and de Búrca, Ch 18.

***	Article 3 TEU 

1.	The Union’s aim is to promote peace, its values and the well-being of its peoples.

2. 	The Union shall offer its citizens an area of freedom, security and justicewithoutinternal frontiers, in which the free movement of persons is ensured in conjunction with appropriate measures with respect to external border controls, asylum, immigration and the prevention and combating of crime.

3.	The Union shall establish an internal market. It shall work for the sustainable development of Europe based on balanced economic growth and price stability, a highly competitive social market economy, aiming at full employment and social progress, and a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment. It shall promote scientific and technological advance.

It shall combat social exclusion and discrimination, and shall promote social justice and protection, equality between women and men, solidarity between generations and protection of the rights of the child.

It shall promote economic, social and territorial cohesion, and solidarity among Member States.

It shall respect its rich cultural and linguistic diversity, and shall ensure that Europe’s cultural heritage is safeguarded and enhanced.

4. The Union shall establish an economic and monetary union whose currency is the euro.

5.	In its relations with the wider world, the Union shall uphold and promote its values and interests and contribute to the protection of its citizens. It shall contribute to peace, security, the sustainable development of the Earth, solidarity and mutual respect among peoples, free and fair trade, eradication of poverty and the protection of human rights, in particular the rights of the child, as well as to the strict observance and the development of international law, including respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter.

6. The Union shall pursue its objectives by appropriate means commensurate with the competences which are conferred upon it in the Treaties.

***	Article 26 TFEU 

1. The Union shall adopt measures with the aim of establishing or ensuring the functioning of the internal market, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Treaties.

2. The internal market shall comprise an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is ensured in accordance with the provisions of the Treaties.

3.	The Council, on a proposal from the Commission, shall determine the guidelines and conditions necessary to ensure balanced progress in all the sectors concerned.


***	Article 27 TFEU

When drawing up its proposals with a view to achieving the objectives set out in Article 26, the Commission shall take into account the extent of the effort that certain economies showing differences in development will have to sustain for the establishment of the internal market and it may propose appropriate provisions.

If these provisions take the form of derogations, they must be of a temporary nature and must cause the least possible disturbance to the functioning of the internal market.

***	Article 28 TFEU 

1.	The Union shall comprise a customs union which shall cover all trade in goods and which shall involve the prohibition between Member States of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having equivalent effect, and the adoption of a common customs tariff in their relations with third countries.

2.	The provisions of Article 30 and of Chapter 2 of this Title shall apply to products originating in Member States and to products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in Member States.

***	Article 29 (ex Article 24 EC)

Products coming from a third country shall be considered to be in free circulation in a Member State if the import formalities have been complied with and any customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied in that Member State, and if they have not benefited from a total or partial drawback of such duties or charges.

***	Article 30 TFEU (ex Article 25 EC)

Customs duties on imports and exports and charges having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States. This prohibition shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.

***	Article 31 TFEU (ex Article 26 EC) 

Common Customs Tariff duties shall be fixed by the Council on a proposal from the Commission.

***	Article 32 TFEU (ex Article 27 EC) 

In carrying out the tasks entrusted to it under this Chapter the Commission shall be guided by:

(a) the need to promote trade between Member States and third countries;

(b) developments in conditions of competition within the Union in so far as they lead to an improvement in the competitive capacity of undertakings;

(c) the requirements of the Union as regards the supply of raw materials and semi-finished goods; in this connection the Commission shall take care to avoid distorting conditions of competition between Member States in respect of finished goods;

(d) the need to avoid serious disturbances in the economies of Member States and to ensure rational development of production and an expansion of consumption within the Union.

***	Harmonisation

- Robert Schuman, 9 May 1950: 
	
‘Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity. The coming together of the nations of Europe requires the elimination of the age of old opposition of France and Germany. Any action taken must in the first place concern these two countries. With this aim in view, the French Government proposes to take action immediately on one limited but decisive point. It proposes to place Franco-German production of coal and steel as a whole under a common higher authority, within the framework of an organization open to the participation of the other countries of Europe. The pooling of coal and steel production should immediately provide for the setting up of common foundations for economic development as a first step in the federation of Europe. … The solidarity in production thus established will make it plain that war between France and Germany becomes not merely unthinkable, but materially impossible’.

- COM (86) 310 final, Commission White Paper on the Internal Market :

‘The reason for getting rid entirely of physical and other controls between Member States is not one of theology or appearance, but the hard practical fact that maintenance of any internal frontier controls will perpetuate the costs and disadvantages of a divided market.’

 - Article 114 TFEU (ex Article 95 TEC)

	1. Save where otherwise provided in the Treaties, the following provisions shall apply 	for the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 26. The European Parliament 	and the Council shall, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure 	and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee, adopt the measures for the 	approximation of the provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action 	in Member States which have as their object the establishment and functioning of the 	internal market.

	2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to fiscal provisions, to those relating to the free 		movement of persons nor to those relating to the rights and interests of employed 	persons.

3. The Commission, in its proposals envisaged in paragraph 1 concerning health, safety, environmental protection and consumer protection, will take as a base a high level of protection, taking account in particular of any new development based on scientific facts. Within their respective powers, the European Parliament and the Council will also seek to achieve this objective.

	4. If, after the adoption of a harmonisation measure by the European Parliament and 	the Council, by the Council or by the Commission, a Member State deems it 	necessary to maintain national provisions on grounds of major needs referred to in 	Article 36, or relating to the protection of the environment or the working environment, 	it shall notify the Commission of these provisions as well as the grounds for 	maintaining them.

	5.Moreover, without prejudice to paragraph 4, if, after the adoption of a harmonisation 	measure by the European Parliament and the Council, by the Council or by the 	Commission, a Member State deems it necessary to introduce national provisions 	based on new scientific evidence relating to the protection of the environment or the 	working environment on grounds of a problem specific to that Member State arising 	after the adoption of the harmonisation measure, it shall notify the Commission of the 	envisaged provisions as well as the grounds for introducing them. 

	6. The Commission shall, within six months of the notifications as referred to in 	paragraphs 4 and 5, approve or reject the national provisions involved after having 	verified whether or not they are a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised 	restriction on trade between Member States and whether or not they shall constitute 	an obstacle to the functioning of the internal market.

	In the absence of a decision by the Commission within this period the national 	provisions referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 shall be deemed to have been approved.
When justified by the complexity of the matter and in the absence of danger for human health, the Commission may notify the Member State concerned that the 	period referred to in this paragraph may be extended for a further period of up to six months.

	7. When, pursuant to paragraph 6,a Member State is authorised to maintain or 	introduce national provisions derogating from a harmonisation measure, the 	Commission shall 	immediately examine whether to propose an adaptation to 	that measure.

	8. When a Member State raises a specific problem on public health in a field which 	has been the subject of prior harmonisation measures, it shall bring it to the attention 	of the Commission which shall immediately examine whether to propose appropriate 	measures to the Council.

	9. By way of derogation from the procedure laid down in Articles 258 and 259, the 	Commission and any Member State may bring the matter directly before the Court of 	Justice of the European Union if it considers that another Member State is making 	improper use of the powers provided for in this Article.

10. The harmonisation measures referred to above shall, in appropriate cases, include a safeguard clause authorising the Member States to take, for one or more of the non-economic reasons referred to in Article 36, provisional measures subject to a Union control procedure.

- Article 115 TFEU (ex Article 94 TEC)

Without prejudice to Article 114, the Council shall, acting unanimously in accordance with a special legislative procedure and after consulting the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee, issue directives for the approximation of such laws, regulations or administrative provisions of the Member States as directly affect the establishment or functioning of the internal market.

FISCAL IMPEDIMENTS TO TRADE

***	The effect of Article 30 TFEU

Case 26/62 Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen [1963] 
ECR 1.

***	The definition of customs duties and charges of equivalent effect 

*Case 7/68 Commission v Italy (re: art treasures) [1968] ECR 423:

3. The provisions of Title 1 of Part Two pf the Treaty introduced the fundamental principle of the elimination of all obstacles to the free movements of goods between Member States by the abolition of, on the one hand, customs duties and charges having equivalent effect and, quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect and, on the other hand, quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect. Exceptions to this fundamental rule must be strictly construed.  

In view of the difference between the measures referred to in Article 16 and Article 36, it is not possible to apply the exception laid down in the latter provision to measures which fall outside the scope of the prohibitions referred to in the chapter relating to the elimination of quantitative restrictions between Member States.

*Case 24/68 Commission v Italy (re: statistical data levy) [1969] ECR 193:

“7. It follows from the system as a whole and from the general and absolute nature of the prohibition of any customs duty applicable to goods moving between Member States that customs duties are prohibited independently of any consideration of the purpose for which they were introduced and the destination of the revenue obtained therefrom. 

The justification for this prohibition is based on the fact that any pecuniary charge, however small, imposed on goods by reason of the fact that they cross a frontier constitutes an obstacle to the movement of such goods”.

Joined Cases 2-3/69 Sociaal Fonds voor de Diamantarbeiders v SA CH Brachfeld & 
Sons  [1969] ECR 211.

Case C-173/05 Commission v Italy [2007] ECR I-04917 

***	Charges for Services Rendered

*Case 24/68 Commission v Italy (re: statistical data levy) [1969] ECR 193:

“6. The statistical information in question is beneficial to the economy as a whole and inter alia to the relevant administrative authorities. Even if the competitive position of importers and exporters were to be particularly improved as a result, the statistics still constitute an advantage so general, and so difficult to assess, that the disputed charge cannot be regarded as the consideration for a specific benefit actually conferred. 

Case 63/74 W Cadsky SpA v Istituto Nazionale per il Commercio Estero [1975] ECR 
281:

“6. Although it is not impossible that in certain circumstances a specific service actually rendered may form the consideration for a possible proportional payment for the service in question, this may only apply in specific cases which cannot lead to the circumvention of the provisions of Articles 9 and 16 of the Treaty. 

7. A quality control carried out by a Member State on products for export alone, coupled with a prohibition on the export of products which do not meet the standards of quality provided for by national law, cannot, in itself, constitute a service provided for the exporter, even if such an obstacle to the free movement of goods were to be considered legal in the absence of Community rules as to quality. 
	
8. Even if the maintenance of the reputation of fruit and vegetable products of a Member State by the indirect expedient of a certificate of inspection and the affixing of a national export stamp is capable of encouraging exports of national products, this benefit relates to the general interest if all exporters, so that the individual interest of each of them is so ill-defined that a charge imposed in payment for this inspection cannot be regarded as consideration for a specific benefit actually and individually conferred”.

Case 87/75 Bresciani v Italian Finance Administration [1976] ECR 129.

***	Charges relating to requirements under EU law

*Case 46/76 Bauhuis v Netherlands [1977] ECR 5:

	“28. These measures are laid down unilaterally by each Member State but have been made obligatory and uniform in the case of all the products in question whichever the exporting Member State or the Member State of destination may be.   
  
   	29. On the other hand, they are not prescribed by each Member State in order to protect some interest of its own but by the Council in the general interest of the Community.   
  
	30.  They cannot therefore be regarded as unilateral measures which hinder trade but rather as operations intended to promote the free movement of goods, in particular by rendering ineffective the obstacles to this free movement which might be created by the measures for veterinary and public health inspections adopted pursuant to Article 36.   
  
	31.  In these circumstances fees charged for veterinary and public health inspections, which are prescribed by a Community provision, which are uniform and are required to be carried out before despatch within the exporting country do not constitute charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on exports, provided that they do not exceed the actual cost of the inspection for which they were charged.   

***	Charges relating to requirements under international law

Case 89/76 Commission v The Netherlands [1977] ECR 1355.

***	Article 110 TFEU (ex Article 90 EC)

No Member State shall impose, directly or indirectly, on the products of other Member States any internal taxation of any kind in excess of that imposed directly or indirectly on similar domestic products.

Furthermore, no Member State shall impose on the products of other Member States any internal taxation of such a nature as to afford indirect protection to other products.

***	The aim of the Treaty prohibition of Article 110 TFEU (ex Art. 90 EC)

*Case 168/78 Commission v France [1980] ECR 347:

	“4. [The provisions of Article 90 EC] supplement, within the system of the Treaty, the provisions of the abolition of customs duties and charges having equivalent effect.  Their aim is to ensure free movement of goods between the Member States in normal conditions of competition by the elimination of all forms of protection which result the application of internal taxation which discriminates against products from other Member States.  ... Article 95 must guarantee the complete neutrality of internal taxation as regards competition between domestic products and imported products.

***	The relationship between Articles 30 and 110 TFEU (ex Arts. 25 and 90 EC) 

Case 77/72 Capolongo v Maya [1973] ECR 611:

12. … Financial charges within a general system of internal taxation applying systematically to domestic and imported products according to the same criteria are not to be considered as charges having equivalent effect. 

The scope of the Article 110 TFEU prohibition

*Case 127/75 Bobie Getraenkevertrieb v Hauptzollamt Aachen-Nord [1976] ECR 
1079:

3. … the first paragraph of Article [110 TFEU] would be infringed if the tax on the imported product and that applied to the similar domestic product were calculated in a different way and in accordance with different rules, leading, even if only in certain cases, to lower taxation of the domestic product. 

***	Article 110(1) TFEU  (ex Art. 90(1) EC): The similarity test 

Case 243/84 John Walker v Ministeriet for Skatter [1986] ECR 875.

***	Article 110(1) TFEU: the scope of the prohibition 

Case 112/84 Humblot v Directeur des Services Fiscaux [1985] ECR 1367:

12. … as Community law stands at present the Member States are at liberty to subject products such as cars to a system of road tax which increases progressively in amount depending on an objective criterion, such as the power rating for tax purposes, which may be determined in various ways.

13. Such a system of domestic taxation is, however, compatible with Article [90] only in so far as it is free from any discriminatory or protective effect. 

14. That is not true of a system like the one at issue in the main proceedings. Under that system there are two distinct taxes: a differential tax which increases progressively and is charged on cars not exceeding that rating which is almost five times as high as the highest rate of the differential tax. Although the system embodies no formal distinction based on the origin of products it manifestly exhibits discriminatory or protective features contrary to Article [90], since the power rating determining liability to the special tax has been fixed at a level such that only imported cars, in particular from other Member States, are subject to the special tax whereas all cars of domestic manufacture are liable to the distinctly more advantageous differential tax. 

***	The notion of competing products

Case 170/78 Commission v UK (re: wine and beer) [1983] ECR 2265.

***	The requirement for objective justification

*Case 140/79 Chemial Farmaceutici v DAF [1981] ECR 1:

14. … in its present stage of development Community law does not restrict the freedom of each Member State to lay down tax arrangements which differentiate between certain products on the basis of objective criteria, such as the nature of the raw materials used or the production processes employed. Such differentiation is compatible with Community law if ti pursues economic policy objectives which are themselves compatible with the requirements of the Treaty and its secondary law and if the detailed rules are such as to avoid any form of discrimination, direct or indirect, in regard to imports from other Member States or any form of protection of competing domestic products. 

15 Differential taxation such as that which exists in Italy fro denatured synthetic alcohol on the one hand and denatured alcohol obtained by fermentation on the other satisfies these requirements. It appears in fact that that system of taxation pursues an objective of legitimate industrial policy in that it is such as to promote the distillation of agricultural products as against the manufacturer of alcohol form petroleum derivatives. That choice does not conflict with the rules of Community law or the requirements of a policy decided within the framework of the Community. 

16. The detailed provisions of the legislation at issue before the national court cannot be considered as discriminatory since, on the one hand, it is not disputed that imports from other Member States of alcohol obtained by fermentation qualify for the same tax treatment as Italian alcohol produced by fermentation and, on the other hand, although the rate of tax prescribed for synthetic alcohol results in restraining the importation of synthetic alcohol originating in other Member States, it has an equivalent economic effect in the national territory in that it also hampers the establishment of profitable production of the same product by Italian industry. 


***	Tax harmonization

- SIXTH COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 77/388/EEC of 17 May 1977 on the harmonization of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes - Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment, 1977] OJ L145/1:

... Whereas account should be taken of the objective of abolishing the imposition of tax on the importation and the remission of tax on exportation in trade between Member States; whereas it should be ensured that the common system of turnover taxes is non-discriminatory as regards the origin of goods and services, so that a common market permitting fair competition and resembling a real internal market may ultimately be achieved;

Article 28
2. ... On the basis of a report from the Commission, the Council shall review the abovementioned reduced rates and exemptions every five years and, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission, shall where appropriate, adopt the measures required to ensure the progressive abolition thereof.

- COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 91/680 supplementing the common system of valued added tax and amending Directive 77/388 with a view to the abolition of fiscal frontiers [1991] OJ L 376/1: 

         THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES,
Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, and in 
particular Article 99 thereof,
         	Having regard to the proposal from the Commission,
         	Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament,
         	Whereas Article 8a of the Treaty defines the internal market as an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is ensured in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty;
         Whereas the completion of the internal market requires the elimination of fiscal frontiers between Member States and that to that end the imposition of tax on imports and the remission of tax on exports in trade between Member States be definitively abolished;
         Whereas fiscal controls at internal frontiers will be definitively abolished as from 1 January 1993 for all transactions between Member States;
         Whereas the imposition of tax on imports and the remission of tax on exports must therefore apply only to transactions with territories excluded from the scope of the common system of value added tax;
         ...
         Whereas the abolition of the principle of the imposition of tax on imports in relations between Member States will make provisions on tax exemptions and duty-free allowances superfluous in relations between Member States; whereas, therefore, those provisions         should be repealed and the relevant Directives adapted accordingly;
         Whereas the achievement of the objective referred to in Article 4 of the First Council Directive of 11 April 1967 [1967] OJ L71/1301], as last amended by the Sixth Directive 77/388/EEC [1977] OJ L145/1], requires that the taxation of trade between Member States be based on the principle of the taxation in the Member State of origin of goods and services supplied without prejudice, as regards Community trade between taxable persons, to the principle that tax revenue from the imposition of tax at the final consumption stage should accrue to the benefit of the Member State in which that final consumption takes place;
         Whereas, however, the determination of the definitive system that will bring about the objectives of the common system of value added tax on goods and services supplied between Member States requires conditions that cannot be completely brought about by 31      December 1992;
         Whereas, therefore, provision should be made for a transitional phase, beginning on 1 January 1993 and lasting for a limited period, during which provisions intended to facilitate transition to the definitive system for the taxation of trade between Member States, which continues to be the medium-term objective, will be implemented;
         Whereas during the transitional period intra-Community transactions carried out by taxable persons other than exempt taxable persons should be taxed in the Member States of destination, at those Member States' rates and under their conditions;
         Whereas intra-Community acquisitions of a certain value by exempt persons or by non-taxable legal persons and certain intra-Community distance selling and supplies of new means of transport to individuals or exempt or non-taxable bodies should also be taxed, during the transitional period, in the Member States of destination, at those Member States' rates and under their conditions, in so far as such transactions would, in the absence of special provisions, be likely to cause significant distortions of competition between Member States;

- COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 92/12/EEC of 25 February 1992 on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products, [1992] OJ L76/1:

                          Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 99 thereof, 
                          Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, 
                          Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament(2) , 
                          ... 
                         Whereas the establishment and functioning of the internal market require the free movement of goods, including those subject to excise duties; 
                          Whereas provision should be made to define the territory on which this Directive, as well as the Directive on the rates and structures of duty on products subject to excise duties, are to be applied; 
                          ...
                          Whereas, in order to ensure the establishment and functioning of the internal market, chargeability of excise duties should be identical in all the Member States; 
                          Whereas any delivery, holding with a view to delivery or supply for the purposes of a trader carrying out an economic activity independently or for the purposes of a body governed by public law, taking place in a Member State other than that in which the product is released for consumption gives rise to chargeability of the excise duty in that other Member State; 
                          Whereas in the case of products subject to excise duty acquired by private individuals for their own use and transported by them, the duty must be charged in the country where they were acquired; 
                          Whereas to establish that products subject to excise duty are not held for private but for commercial purposes, Member States must take account of a number of criteria; 
                          Whereas products subject to excise duty purchased by persons who are not approved warehousekeepers or registered or non-registered traders and dispatched or transported directly or indirectly by the vendor or on his behalf must be subject to excise duty in the Member State of destination;

Article 3 
                          1. This Directive shall apply at Community level to the following products as defined in the relevant Directives: 
                          - mineral oils, 
                          - alcohol and alcoholic beverages, 
                          - manufactured tobacco.

Article 8 
                          As regards products acquired by private individuals for their own use and transported by them, the principle governing the internal market lays down that excise duty shall be charged in the Member State in which they are acquired. 

Article 9 
1. ... excise duty shall become chargeable where products for consumption in 
a Member State are held for commercial purpose in another Member State. 
                          In this case, the duty shall be due in the Member State in whose territory the
products are and shall become chargeable to the holder of the products. 
                          
2. To establish that the products referred to in Article 8 are intended for 
commercial purposes, Member States must take account, inter alia, of the following: 
-	the commercial status of the holder of the products and his reasons for 
holding them, 
-	the place where the products are located or, if appropriate, the mode of 
transport used, 
                          - any document relating to the products, 
                          - the nature of the products, 
                          - the quantity of the products. 

                          For the purposes of applying the content of the fifth indent of the first 
subparagraph, Member States may lay down guide levels, solely as a form of 
evidence. These guide levels may not be lower than: 
          (a) Tobacco products
                          cigarettes 800 items
                          cigarillos (cigars weighing not more than 3 g each)400 items
                          cigars 200 items
                          smoking tobacco 1,0 kg; 
           (b) Alcoholic beverages
                          spirit drinks 10 l
                          intermediate products 20 l
                          wines (including a maximum of 60 l of sparkling wines) 90 l
                          beers 110 l.

***	Buying wine for the use of other individuals

*Case C-5/05 Joustra [2006] ECR I-11075. 
35    … it is clear from the actual terms in which Article 8 of … Directive [92/12] is couched that it requires that the products be intended for the personal use of the private individual who has acquired them and that it therefore excludes products acquired by a private individual for the use of other private individuals. The latter products cannot be considered to be held for strictly personal purposes by the private individual who has acquired them.
…………………………………..
37      … it is also apparent from the words ‘transported by them’ in Article 8 of the Directive that, for that provision to apply, the products in question must have been transported personally by the private individual who purchased them … 
………………………………………
44      That interpretation is all the more compelling because, if Article 8 of the Directive were also applicable where the transport is not carried out personally by the private individual, the effect of that, for the competent authorities of the Member States, would be an increased risk of fraud as the transport of products covered by that provision requires no documentation.
45      However, the Commission submits that such an interpretation of Article 8 would be a retrograde step for the citizens of the European Union as against the situation which prevailed before the Directive entered into force in so far as, under the legislation applicable at that time, the personal effects transported in the course of a removal to another Member State and small consignments which were not of a commercial nature from one private individual to another were exempt from excise duty in the Member State of importation.
46      In that regard, however, it is sufficient to state that, although, as the Commission in fact admits, Article 8 of the Directive contains a lacuna in this regard, it is for the Community legislature to remedy it, if necessary, by adopting the measures required in order to amend that provision. This is, moreover, confirmed by the fact that a proposed amendment to the Directive has in fact been submitted by the Commission to the Council of the European Union for the purpose, inter alia, of extending the benefit of Article 8 thereof to products transported on behalf of private individuals.
Further reading

Chalmers, Davies, Monti, 667-677.
Barnard, The Substantive Law of the EU - The Four Freedoms (OUP, 4th ed.), chs 2 and 3.
Wyatt and Dashwood's European Union Law (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2011), Ch. 13.
Snell, J., ‘Non-Discriminatory tax obstacles in Community law’, (2007) 56 ICLQ 339.






















Lecture 2		Non-fiscal restrictions: Quantitative 
restrictions and measures of equivalent effect I

MAIN READING

Craig and de Búrca, Ch 19 (note that this Chapter will also cover the material discussed at Lecture 3).

***	Article 34 TFEU (ex Article 28 EC)

Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States.

***	Article 35 TFEU (ex Article 29 EC)

Quantitative restrictions on exports, and all measures having equivalent effect, shall be prohibited between Member States.

***	Article 36 TFEU (ex Article 30 EC)

The provisions of Articles 34 and 35 shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; or the protection of industrial and commercial property. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States.

***	Goods in free circulation

Case 41/76 Donckerwolcke [1976] ECR 1921. 

***	The scope of Article 34 TFEU (ex Art. 28 EC): the first phase 

*Case 8/74 Procureur du Roi v Dassonville [1974] ECR 837.

“5. All trading rules enacted by Member States which are capable of hindering, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, intra-Community trade are to be considered as measures having an effect equivalent to quantitative restrictions”.

*Case 45/87 Commission v Ireland [1988] ECR 4929. 
	
(i) Import bans, quotas and licences

Case 124/81 Commission v UK (re: UHT milk) [1983] ECR 203..

(ii) Origin marking

Case 113/80 Commission v Ireland (re: Irish souvenirs) [1981] ECR 1625.

(iii)Veterinary, sanitary and similar inspections

*Case 35/76 Simmenthal v Minister for Finance [1976] ECR 1871:

“14. Article [30 EC] is not designed to reserve certain matters to the exclusive jurisdiction of Member States but permits national laws to derogate from the principle of the free movement of goods to the extent to which such derogation is and continues to be justified for the attainment of the objectives referred to in that article”.

(iv) Legislation favouring domestic production 

*Case 249/81 Commission v Ireland (Buy Irish campaign) [1982] ECR 4005.
Case 222/82 Apple & Pear Development Council v K.J. Lewis Ltd [1983] ECR 4083. 

(v) Other forms of measures of equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions

*Case C-265/95 Commission v France [1997] ECR I-6959.
*C-112/00 Schmidberger [2003] ECR I-5659. 

***	National autonomy recognised

Case 34/79 Henn and Darby [1979] ECR 3795.
Case 121/85 Conegate Ltd v Commissioners of Customs and Excise [1986] ECR 
	1007.
*Case 72/83 Campus Oil v Minister for Industry and Energy [1984] ECR 2727.  

***	The scope of Article 34 TFEU (ex Art. 28 EC): the second phase

*Case 120/78 Casis de Dijon  [1979] ECR 649:

“8. In the absence of common rules relating to the production and marketing of alcohol … it is for the Member States to regulate all matters relating to the production and marketing of alcohol and alcoholic beverages on their own territory.
       Obstacles to movement within the Community resulting from disparities between the national laws relating to the marketing of the products in question must be accepted so far as those provisions may be recognized as being necessary in order to satisfy mandatory requirements relating in particular to the effectiveness of fiscal supervision, the protection of public health, the fairness of commercial transactions and the defence of the consumer. 	

“14 … There is … no valid reason why, provided that they have been lawfully produced and marketed in one of the Member States, alcoholic beverages should not be introduced into any other Member State; the sale of such products may not be subject to a legal prohibition on the marketing of beverages with an alcohol content lower than the limit set by the national rules”. 

(i) Content controls

*Case 178/84 Commission v Germany (re: beer purity) [1987] ECR 1227.
Case 274/87 Commission v Germany (re: meat products) [1989] ECR 229.

(ii) Marketing restrictions 

*Case 207/83 Commission v UK (origin marking) [1985] ECR 1202. 
Case 261/81 Walter Rau v de Smedt [1982] ECR 3961.
Case 302/86 Commission v Denmark (re: beer cans) [1988] ECR 4607.

***	The problem of delimitation 

	(i) Beyond the scope of Article 34 TFEU (ex Art. 28 EC)

Case 75/81 Blesgen v Belgium [1982] ECR 1211.
Case 155/80 Summary proceedings against Sergius Oebel [1981] ECR 1993.
*Case C-23/89 Quietlynn Ltd v Southend-on-Sea BC [1990] ECR I-3059.

(ii) Within the scope of Article 34 TFEU (ex Art. 28 EC)

*Cases 60 and 61/84 Cinetheque SA v Federation Nationale des Cinemas Francais 
[1985] ECR 2605.
Case 286/81 Oosthoek Uitgeversmaatschapij BV [1982] ECR 4575.
Case 382/87 Buet v Ministère Public [19829] ECR 1235. 

*Case 145/88 Torfaen BC v B & Q plc [1989] ECR 3851:

14 [National rules governing the opening hours of retail premises] reflect certain political and economic choices in so far as their purpose is to ensure that working and non-working hours are so arranged as to accord with national or regional socio-cultural characteristics, and that, in the present state of Community law, is a matter for the Member States. Furthermore, such rules are not designed to govern the patterns of trade between Member States. 

Case C-169/91 Stoke-on-Trent and Norwich City Councils v B&Q [1992] ECR I-6635:

‘15 Appraising the proportionality of national rules which pursue a legitimate aim under Community law involves weighing the national interest in attaining that aim against the Community interest in ensuring the free movement of goods. In that regard, in order to verify that the restrictive effects on intra-Community trade of the rules at issue do not exceed what is necessary to achieve the aim in view, it must be considered whether those effects are direct, indirect or purely speculative and whether those effects do not impede the marketing of imported products more than the marketing of national products’. 

Reading list

Chalmers, Davies, Monti, 754-783.
Barnard, ch. 4.
Wyatt and Dashwood's 	European Union Law (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2011) 407-418.
Oliver, P.  (ed.), Oliver on Free Movement of Goods in the European Union (Oxford: Hart 	Publishing 2010) 84-110.
Maduro, M.P., We, the Court (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 1998).
Bernard, N., 'On the Art of Not Mixing One's Drinks: Dassonville and Cassis de Dijon 	Revisited' in Maduro, M.P. ad Azoulai, L. (eds), The Past and Future of EU Law-The 	Classics of EU Law Revisited on the 50th Anniversary of the Rome Treaty (Oxford: 	Hart Publishing 2010) 456. 
Regan. D., 'An Outsider's View of Dassonville and Cassis de Dijon: On Interpretation and 	Policy' in Maduro and Azoulai (eds), The Past and Future of EU Law 465.
Jarvis, M., The Application of EC Law by National Courts – the Free Movement of Goods 	(Oxford: OUP, 1998).
Arnull, A., ‘What Shall We Do on Sunday?’, (1991) 16 ELRev 195. 
Barnard, C., ‘Sunday Trading: A Drama in Five Acts’, (1994) 57 MLR 449.
Steiner, J., ‘Drawing the Line: Uses and Abuses of Article 30 EEC’, (1992) 29 CMLRev 749. 
White, E., ‘In Search of the Limits to Article 30 of the EEC Treaty’, (1989) 26 CMLRev 235.
Wils, ‘Searching for the Rule in Art. 30: much ado about nothing?’, (1993) 18 ELRev 475. 



Lecture 3 		Quantitative restrictions and 
measures of equivalent effect II

MAIN READING

Craig and de Búrca, Ch. 19.

***	The scope of Article 34 TFEU (ex Art. 28 EC): the third phase

*Joined Cases C-267-8/91 Criminal Proceedings against Keck and Mithouard [1993]
ECR I-6097: 

15 It is established by the case-law beginning with "Cassis de Dijon" (Case 120/78 Rewe-Zentral v Bundesmonopolverwaltung fuer Branntwein [1979] ECR 649) that, in the absence of harmonization of legislation, obstacles to free movement of goods which are the consequence of applying, to goods coming from other Member States where they are lawfully manufactured and marketed, rules that lay down requirements to be met by such goods (such as those relating to designation, form, size, weight, composition, presentation, labelling, packaging) constitute measures of equivalent effect prohibited by Article 30. This is so even if those rules apply without distinction to all products unless their application can be justified by a public-interest objective taking precedence over the free movement of goods. 

16. [C]ontrary to what has previously been decided, the application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting certain selling arrangements is not such as to hinder directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, trade between Member States within the meaning of the Dassonville judgment  … provided that those provisions apply to all affected traders operating within the national territory and provided that they affect in the same manner, in law and fact, the marketing of domestic products of those from other Member States. 

17 Provided that those conditions are fulfilled, the application of such rules to the sale of products from another Member State meeting the requirements laid down by that State is not by nature such as to prevent their access to the market or to impede access any more than it impedes the access of domestic products. Such rules therefore fall outside the scope of Article 30 of the Treaty.

(i) Packaging and labelling

Case C-315/92 Verband Sozialer Wettbewerb eV v Clinique Laboratories SNC [1994] 
ECR I-317. 
*Case C-470/93 Verein gegen Unwesen in Handel und Gebewe Koeln eV v Mars 
GmbH [1995] ECR I-1923.

(ii Shop and working hours

Joined Cases C-418-21/93, 460-2/93, 464/93, 9-11/94, 14-5/94, 23-4/94 and 332/94
 Semeraro Casa Uno Srl and Others v Sindaco del Comune di Erbusco and 
Others [1996] ECR I-2975.
Joined Cases C-69/93 and 258/93 Punto Casa SpA v Sindaco del Comune di Capena 
[1994] ECR I-2355. 


(iii) Advertising

Case C-292/92 Hünermund and others v Landesapothekerkammer Baden-
Wuerttemberg [1993] ECR I-6787. 
Case C-412/93 Societe d’Importation Edouard Leclerc-Siplec v TFI Publicite & M6 
Publicite [1995] ECR I-179.
*Joined Cases C-34-6/95 Konsummentombudsmannen v De Agostini Forlag AB and 
TV-Shop in Sverige AB [1997] ECR I-3843.
*Case C-405/98 Konsumerntombudsmannen (KO) v Gourmet International Products 
AB (GIP) [2001] ECR I-1795. 
Case C-322/01 Deutscher Apothekerverband eV v 0800 DocMorris NV, Jaques Waterval 
[2003] ECR I-14887. 

74. A prohibition such as that at issue in the main proceedings is more of an obstacle to pharmacies outside Germany than to those within it. Although there is little doubt that as a result of the prohibition, pharmacies in Germany cannot use the extra or alternative method of gaining access to the German market consisting of end consumers of medicinal products, they are still able to sell the products in their dispensaries. However, for pharmacies not established in Germany, the internet provides a more significant way to gain direct access to the German market. A prohibition which has a greater impact on pharmacies established outside German territory could impede access to the market for products from other Member States more than it impedes access for domestic products.
………………………………………….
124. … that Article 30 EC may be relied on to justify a national prohibition on the sale by mail order of medicinal products the sale of which is restricted to pharmacies in the Member State concerned in so far as the prohibition covers medicinal products subject to prescription. However, Article 30 EC cannot be relied on to justify an absolute prohibition on the sale by mail order of medicinal products which are not subject to prescription in the Member State concerned.

(iv) Licencing and restrictions on retail outlets

Case C-391/92 Commission v Greece [1995] ECR I-1621.

Joined Cases C-158/04 and C-159/04 Alfa Vita and Carrefour-Marinopoulos v Elliniko 
Dimosio [2006] ECR I-8135.

19. It is common ground that the principal characteristic of ‘bake-off’ products is that they are delivered at sales outlets after the main stages of preparation of those products have been completed. At those sales outlets, only a brief thawing and reheating or final baking are carried out. In those circumstances, requiring vendors of ‘bake-off’ products to comply with all of the requirements imposed on traditional bakeries, including, in particular, the requirement of having a flour store, an area for kneading equipment and a solid-fuel store, does not take the specific nature of those products into account and entails additional costs, thereby making the marketing of those products more difficult. That legislation therefore constitutes a barrier to imports which cannot be regarded as establishing a selling arrangement as contemplated in Keck and Mithouard (paragraphs 15 and 16).
………………….
25. … whilst it may be legitimate to adopt measures aimed at avoiding a situation in which consumers confuse traditional bakery products with ‘bake-off’ products, the national legislation at issue here, as it has been put into practice, does not enable customers at bread sales outlets to distinguish traditional products from ‘bake-off’ products. As noted by the Advocate General in point 62 of his Opinion, this objective could be achieved by means which are less restrictive on the marketing of ‘bake-off’ products, such as appropriate information and labelling.
…………………………………
27. Whilst it may be true that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings contains provisions aimed at ensuring that bakery products are prepared and marketed in proper hygienic conditions, the fact remains that it also lays down a number of requirements relating to the manufacturing method of traditional bakery products which are inappropriate and go beyond what is necessary to protect public health when they apply to products such as ‘bake-off’ products, which are pre-baked and are merely thawed and reheated or receive the final stage of baking at the outlets where they are sold. As acknowledged by the Greek authorities in their observations, this is the case inter alia in regard to those requirements relating to the presence of a flour store or an area for kneading equipment.

(v) Sales methods

*Case 368/95 Vereinigte Familiapress Zeitungsverlags-Und Vertriebs GmbH v 
Heinrich Bauer Verlag [1997] ECR I-3689.

***	How clear is the clarification?

*Case C-254/98 Schutzverband gegen unlauteren Wettbewerb v TK-Heimdienst Sass
 GmbH [2000] ECR I-151. 

Case C-20/03 Burmanjeer [2005] ECR I-4133:

29 As regards the second condition, it should be noted that the national rules on itinerant sales do not impose a total prohibition of a selling arrangement, in a Member State, of a product which is lawfully marketed there. The rules confine themselves to making the itinerant sale, without prior authorisation, of subscriptions to periodicals an offence, and that, according to the Belgian Government, for reasons relating in particular to consumer protection. Furthermore, not all itinerant sales of subscriptions are covered. That Government submits that the need for special protection does not operate either for sales of subscriptions to periodicals, in particular at annual fairs and exhibitions, or for the conclusion of contracts for subscriptions to newspapers as part of a regular service for an established local clientele.

30 It is common ground that a national system such as the rules on itinerant sales is, in principle, likely to limit the total volume of sales of the goods in question in the Member State concerned and, consequently, also to reduce the volume of sales of goods from other Member States. It is also indisputable that the itinerant sale of subscriptions may be a good way of bringing to consumers’ knowledge periodicals from all sources. The Commission submits in that regard that the latter statement is true, in particular, as regards periodicals of foreign origin.

31 However, the information available to the Court does not enable it to establish with certainty whether the national rules on itinerant sales affect the marketing of products from Member States other than the Kingdom of Belgium to any greater degree than that of products from that State. Nevertheless, it seems to follow from the information in the file transmitted to the Court that, if those rules did have such an effect, it would be too insignificant and uncertain to be regarded as being such as to hinder or otherwise interfere with trade between Member States.

***	How about rules on the use of products?

Case C-265/06 Commission v Portugal [tinted film on car windows) [2008] ECR I-2245.

*Case C-110/05 Commission v Italy (re: trailers) [2009] ECR I-519:

33      It should be recalled that, according to settled case-law, all trading rules enacted by Member States which are capable of hindering, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, intra-Community trade are to be considered as measures having an effect equivalent to quantitative restrictions and are, on that basis, prohibited by Article 28 EC (see, in particular, Dassonville, paragraph 5).
34      It is also apparent from settled case-law that Article 28 EC reflects the obligation to respect the principles of non-discrimination and of mutual recognition of products lawfully manufactured and marketed in other Member States, as well as the principle of ensuring free access of Community products to national markets (see, to that effect, Case 174/82 Sandoz [1983] ECR 2445, paragraph 26; Case 120/78 Rewe‑Zentral (‘Cassis de Dijon’) [1979] ECR 649, paragraphs 6, 14 and 15; and Keck and Mithouard, paragraphs 16 and 17).
35      Hence, in the absence of harmonisation of national legislation, obstacles to the free movement of goods which are the consequence of applying, to goods coming from other Member States where they are lawfully manufactured and marketed, rules that lay down requirements to be met by such goods constitute measures of equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions even if those rules apply to all products alike (see, to that effect, ‘Cassis de Dijon’, paragraphs 6, 14 and 15; Case C‑368/95 Familiapress [1997] ECR I-3689, paragraph 8; and Case C‑322/01 Deutscher Apothekerverband [2003] ECR I-14887, paragraph 67).
36      By contrast, the application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting certain selling arrangements is not such as to hinder directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, trade between Member States for the purposes of the case‑law flowing from Dassonville, on condition that those provisions apply to all relevant traders operating within the national territory and that they affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States. Provided that those conditions are fulfilled, the application of such rules to the sale of products from another Member State meeting the requirements laid down by that State is not by nature such as to prevent their access to the market or to impede access any more than it impedes the access of domestic products (see Keck and Mithouard, paragraphs 16 and 17).
37      Consequently, measures adopted by a Member State the object or effect of which is to 	treat products coming from other Member States less favourably are to be regarded 	as measures having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions on imports within the 	meaning of Article 28 EC, as are the measures referred to in paragraph 35 of the 	present judgment. Any other measure which hinders access of products originating in 	other Member States to the market of a Member State is also covered by that.

56     ...  a prohibition on the use of a product in the territory of a Member State has a considerable influence on the behaviour of consumers, which, in its turn, affects the access of that product to the market of that Member State.
57      Consumers, knowing that they are not permitted to use their motorcycle with a trailer 	specially designed for it, have practically no interest in buying such a trailer (see, by 	analogy, Case C‑265/06 Commission v Portugal [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 33, 	concerning the affixing of tinted film to the windows of motor vehicles). Thus, Article 	56 of the Highway Code prevents a demand from existing in the market at issue for 	such trailers and therefore hinders their importation.

*Case C-142/05 Mickelsson and Roos (re: jet skis) [2009] ECR I-4273:

28  ... where the national regulations for the designation of navigable waters and waterways have the effect of preventing users of personal watercraft from using them for the specific and inherent purposes for which they were intended or of greatly restricting their use, which is for the national court to ascertain, such regulations have the effect of hindering the access to the domestic market in question for those goods and therefore constitute, save where there is a justification pursuant to Article 30 EC or there are overriding public interest requirements, measures having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions on imports prohibited by Article 28 EC.

***	The issue of horizontal effect 

 - Case 22/82 Apple and Pear Development Council 

- Case C-265/95 Commission v France 

- Case C-112/00 Schmidberger

Case C-171/11 Fra.bo, ECLI:EU:C:2012:453.

Reading list

Chalmers, Davies, Monti, 786-796.
Barnard, ch. 5-6.
Wyatt and Dashwood's 	European Union Law, 418-446. 

Oliver and Martinez, ‘Free movement of goods’ in Barnard and Peers (eds), European Union 
	Law (OUP, 2014) Ch. 12. 
Oliver, P.  (ed.), Oliver on Free Movement of Goods in the European Union (Oxford: Hart 	Publishing 2010) 113-132 and Ch. 7. 
Koutrakos, P., ‘On groceries, alcohol and olive oil: more on free movement of goods after 
Keck’, (2001) 26 ELRev 391.
Nic Shuibhne, N., ‘Omnibuses’, (2013) 38 ELRev 735-736.
Spaventa, E., 'Leaving Keck Behond? The Free Movement of Goods after the Rulings in 	Commission v Italy and Mickelsson and Roos', (2009) 34 ELRev 914.
Horsley, T., 'Annotation on Case C-110/05, Commission v. Italy; Case C-142/05, Åklagaren 	v. Percy Mickelsson and Joakim Roos; Case C-265/06, Commission v. Portugal, 	(2009) 46 CMLRev 2001.
Wenneras, P. and Boe Moen, K., 'Selling Arrtangements, Keeping Keck', (2010) 35 ELRev 	387.
Enchelmaier, E., 'Moped Trailers, Mickelsson & Roos, Gysbrechts: The ECJ's Case Law on 	Goods Keeps on Moving', (2010) 29 YEL190.
Oliver and Enchelmaier, ‘Free Movement of Goods: Recent Developments in the Case Law’, 
(2007) 44 CMLRev 649.
Snell, J., 'The Notion of Market Access: A Concept or a Slogan?', (2010) 47 CMLRev 2001.
Oliver, P., 'Of Trailers and Jet-skis: Is the Case Law on Article 34 TFEU (ex Article 28 EC) 	Careering in a New Direction?', (2011) 33 Fordham International Law Journal 1423.
Gormley, L., 'The Definition of Measures Having Equivalent Effect' in Arnull, A., Eeckhout, P. 	and Tridimas, T. (eds), Continuity and Change in EU Law-Essays in Honour of Sir 	Francis Jacobs (Oxford: OUP, 2008) 189.
Horsley, 'Unearthing Buried Treasure: Article 34 TFEU and the Exclusionary Rules', (2012) 37 	ELRev 734.
Nic Shuibhne, 'Editorial: The Treaty is coming to get you', (2012) 37 ELRev 367.
Reich, N., ‘The “November Revolution” of the European Court of Justice: Keck, Meng and 	Audi Revisited’, (1994) 31 CMLRev 459.
Weatherill, S., ‘After Keck: Some Thoughts on how to Clarify the Clarification’, (1996) 33 	CMLRev 885.
Davies, G., ‘Can selling arrangements be harmonized?’, (2005) 30 ELRev 370.
Van Harten, H. and Nauta, T., ‘Towards Horizontal Direct Effect for the Free Movement of 
	Goods? Comment on Fra.Bo’, (2013) 38 ELRev 677.





Lecture 4 		Parallel imports: Intellectual 
Property Rights and Free 
Movement of Goods 

MAIN READING

Barnard: the Chapter on IP is only available online 	(http://global.oup.com/uk/orc/law/eu/barnard4e/student/additional/)

***	Article 345 TFEU (ex Article 295 EC)

The Treaties shall in no way prejudice the rules in Member States governing the system of property ownership.
***	The case of trademarks: subject-matter and exhaustion 

*Case C-16/74 Centrafarm BV et Adriaan de Peijper v Winthrop BV [1974] ECR 1183:
	
“6. ... it is clear from [Article 30 EC], in particular its second sentence, as well as from the context, that whilst the Treaty does not affect the existence of rights recognized by the legislation of a Member State in matters of industrial and commercial property, yet the exercise of these rights may nevertheless, depending on the circumstances, be affected by the prohibitions in the Treaty.
	
7. Inasmuch as it provides an exception to one of the fundamental principles of the common market, Article [30] in fact only admits of derogations from the free movement of goods where such derogations are justified for the purpose of safeguarding rights which constitute the specific subject-matter of this property.
	
8. In relation to trade marks, the specific subject-matter of the industrial property is the guarantee that the owner of the trade mark has the exclusive right to use that trade mark, for the purpose of putting products protected by the trade mark into circulation for the first time, and is therefore intended to protect him against competitors wishing to take advantage of the status and reputation of the trade mark by selling products illegally bearing that trade mark.”

 9. An obstacle to the free movement of goods may arise out of the existence within a national legislation industrial and commercial property, of provisions laying down that a trade mark owner’s right is not exhausted when the protected by the trade mark is marketed in another Member State, with the result that the trade mark owner can prevent importation of the product into his own Member State when it has been marketed in another Member State.

10. Such an obstacle is not justified when the product has been put onto the market in a legal manner in the Member State from which it has been imported, by the trade mark owner himself or with this consent, so that there can be no question of abuse or infringement of the trade mark”.

Case 78/77 Deutsche Grammophon v Metro [1971] ECR 487.

***	Exception (i): once there was a single trademark proprietor

Case 192/73 Hag I [1974] ECR 731.
*Case C-10/89 Hag II [1990] ECR I-3711.
	
13. Trade mark rights are, it should be noted, an essential element in the system of undistorted competition which the Treaty seeks to establish and maintain. Under such a system, an undertaking must be in a position to keep its customers by virtue of the quality of its products and services, something which is possible only if there are distinctive marks which enable customers to identify those products and services. For the trade mark to be able to fulfil this role, it must offer a guarantee that all goods bearing it have been produced under the control of a single undertaking which is accountable for their quality.
16. … the essential function of the trade mark would be jeopardized if the proprietor of the trade mark could not exercise the right conferred on him by national legislation to oppose the importation of similar goods bearing a designation liable to be confused with his own trade mark, because, in such a situation, consumers would no longer be able to identify for certain the origin of the marked goods and the proprietor of the trade mark could be held responsible for the poor quality of goods for which he was in no way accountable .
17. This analysis cannot be altered by the fact that the mark protected by national legislation and the similar mark borne by the imported goods by virtue of the legislation of their Member State of origin originally belonged to the same proprietor, who was divested of one of them following expropriation by one of the two States prior to the establishment of the Community.

***	The issue of the existence of an economic link

*Case C-9/93 Ideal Standard [1994] ECR I-2789.

39. Articles 30 and 36 [now 28 and 30 EC] thus debar the application of national laws which allow recourse to trade-mark rights in order to prevent the free movement of a product bearing a trade mark whose use is under unitary control. 

40 The problem posed by the Oberlandesgericht' s question is whether the same principles apply where the trade mark has been assigned, for one or several Member States only, to an undertaking which has no economic link with the assignor and the assignor opposes the marketing, in the State in which he has retained the trade mark, of products to which the trade mark has been affixed by the assignee. 

41 That situation must be clearly distinguished from the case where the imported products come from a licensee or a subsidiary to which ownership of the trade-mark right has been assigned in the exporting State: a contract of assignment by itself, that is in the absence of any economic link, does not give the assignor any means of controlling the quality of products which are marketed by the assignee and to which the latter has affixed the trade mark.

***	Exception (ii): the risk of confusion   

Case 119/75 Terrapin v Terranova [1976] ECR 1039.

***	Exception (iii): repackaging

Case 102/77 Hoffmann-La Roche &CO AG v Centrafarm Vertriebsgesellschaft 
Pharmazeutischer Erzeugnisse mbH [1978] ECR 1139.

14. A. The proprietor of the a trade-mark right which is protected in two Member states at the same time is justified pursuant to the first sentence of Article 36 [now 30 EC] in preventing a product to which the trade-mark has lawfully been applied in one of those States from being marketed in the other Member State after it has been repacked in new packaging to which the trade-mark has been affixed by a third party.
B. However, such prevention of marketing constitutes a disguised 
restriction on trade between Member States within the meaning of the second sentence of Article 36 [now 30 EC] where: 
- it is established that the use of the trade mark right by the proprietor, having regard to the marketing system which he has adopted, will contribute to the artificial partitioning of the markets between Member States; 
- it is shown that the repackaging cannot adversely affect the original condition of the product; 
- the proprietor of the mark received prior notice of the marketing of the repackaged product; and
- it is stated on the new packaging by whom the product has been repackaged.

Case C-443/99 Merck, Sharp and Dohme GmbH v Paranova Pharmazeutika HAndels 
	GmbH [2002] ECR I-3703.

*Case C-143/00 Boehringer Ingelheim KG and others v Swingward Ltd and others 
	[2002] ECR I-3579.

47. Such an impediment exists, for example, where pharmaceutical products purchased by the parallel importer cannot be placed on the market in the Member State of importation in their original packaging by reason of national rules or practices relating to packaging, or where sickness insurance rules make reimbursement of medical expenses depend on a certain packaging or where well-established medical prescription practices are based, inter alia, on standard sizes recommended by professional groups and sickness insurance institutions. In that regard, it is sufficient for there to be an impediment in respect of one type of packaging used by the trade mark proprietor in the Member State of importation (see Bristol-Myers Squibb and Others, paragraphs 53 and 54).

48. In contrast, the trade mark proprietor may oppose the repackaging if it is based solely on the parallel importer's attempt to secure a commercial advantage (see, to that effect, Upjohn, paragraph 44).

49. In that context, it has also been held that the trade mark proprietor may oppose replacement packaging where the parallel importer is able to reuse the original packaging for the purpose of marketing in the Member State of importation by affixing labels to that packaging (see Bristol-Myers Squibb and Others, paragraph 55).

50. Thus, while the trade mark proprietor may oppose the parallel importer's use of replacement packaging, that is conditional on the relabelled pharmaceutical product being able to have effective access to the market concerned.

51. Resistance to relabelled pharmaceutical products does not always constitute an impediment to effective market access such as to make replacement packaging necessary, within the meaning of the Court's case-law.

52. However, there may exist on a market, or on a substantial part of it, such strong resistance from a significant proportion of consumers to relabelled pharmaceutical products that there must be held to be a hindrance to effective market access. In those circumstances, repackaging of the pharmaceutical products would not be explicable solely by the attempt to secure a commercial advantage. The purpose would be to achieve effective market access.

53. It is for the national court to determine whether that is the case.

***	Directive 2008/95/EC to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks [2008] OJ L 299/25.

Article 7
Exhaustion of the rights conferred by a trade mark
	
	1. The trade mark shall not entitle the proprietor to prohibit its use in relation to goods 	which have been put on the market in the Community under that trade mark by the 	proprietor or with his consent.

	2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply where there exist legitimate reasons for the proprietor 	to oppose further commercialisation of the goods, especially where the condition of 	the goods is changed or impaired after they have been put on the market.

***	EU/EEA exhaustion versus international exhaustion

*Case C-355/96 Silhouette International Schmied GmbH & Co. KG v Hartlauer 
Handelsgesellschaft mbH [1998] ECR I-4799. 

25 In the light of those recitals, Articles 5 to 7 of the Directive must be construed as embodying a complete harmonisation of the rules relating to the rights conferred by a trade mark….
26 Accordingly, the Directive cannot be interpreted as leaving it open to the 
Member States to provide in their domestic law for exhaustion of the rights conferred by a trade mark in respect of products put on the market in non-member countries. 
27 This, moreover, is the only interpretation which is fully capable of ensuring that the purpose of the Directive is achieved, namely to safeguard the functioning of the internal market. A situation in which some Member States could provide for international exhaustion while others provided for Community exhaustion only would inevitably give rise to barriers to the free movement of goods and the freedom to provide services.
37 The answer to be given to the second question must therefore be that, subject to the national court's duty to interpret, so far as possible, domestic law in conformity with Community law, Article 7(1) of the Directive cannot be interpreted as meaning that the proprietor of a trade mark is entitled, on the basis of that provision alone, to obtain an order restraining a third party from using his trade mark for products which have been put on the market outside the EEA under that mark by the proprietor or with his consent. 

*Joined Cases C-414/99 to C-416/99 Davidoff and Levi Strauss [2001] ECR I-8691.

	45. In view of its serious effect in extinguishing the exclusive rights of the proprietors 	of the trade marks in issue in the main proceedings (rights which enable them to 	control the initial marketing in the EEA), consent must be so expressed that an 	intention to renounce those rights is unequivocally demonstrated.

	46. Such intention will normally be gathered from an express statement of consent. 	Nevertheless, it is conceivable that consent may, in some cases, be inferred from 	facts and circumstances prior to, simultaneous with or subsequent to the placing of 	the goods on the market outside the EEA which, in the view of the national court, 	unequivocally demonstrate that the proprietor has renounced his rights.
	..........
	54. It follows that it is for the trader alleging consent to prove it and not for the trade 	mark proprietor to demonstrate its absence.

	55. Consequently, implied consent to the marketing within the EEA of goods put on 	the market outside that area cannot be inferred from the mere silence of the trade 	mark proprietor.

	56. Likewise, implied consent cannot be inferred from the fact that a trade mark 	proprietor has not communicated his opposition to marketing within the EEA or from 	the fact that the goods do not carry any warning that it is prohibited to place them on 	the market within the EEA.

	57. Finally, such consent cannot be inferred from the fact that the trade mark 	proprietor transferred ownership of the goods bearing the mark without imposing 	contractual reservations or from the fact that, according to the law governing the 	contract, the property right transferred includes, in the absence of such reservations, 	an unlimited right of resale or, at the very least, a right to market the goods 	subsequently within the EEA.

Reading list
 
Wyatt and Dashwood, pp. 449-453 and 456-460. 
O’Keeffe, D. and Keane, B., annotation on Davidoff and Levi Straus, (2002) 39 CMLRev 591.
O’Keeffe, D. and Keane, B., ‘The Shadow of Silhouette’, (2000) 19 YEL 139.
Koutrakos, P., ‘In Search of a Common Vocabulary in Free Movement of Goods: the example 	of repackaging pharmaceuticals’, (2003) 28 ELRev 53.
Dyrberg, P. and Petursson, G.T., ‘What is Consent? A note on Davidoff and  Levi Straus’, 	(2002) 27 ELRev 464.
Govaere, I., ‘The Quest for a Master Key to control Parallel Imports’, (2001) 4 Cambridge 	Yearbook of European Legal Studies 191.
Alexander, W., ‘Exhaustion of Trade Mark Rights in the European Economic Area’, (1999) 24 	ELRev 56.
Gippini-Fournier, E., annotation Case C-355/96 Silhouette, (1999) 36 CMLRev 807.
Cornish, W.R., ‘Trade Marks: Portcullis for the EEA?’, (1998) EIPR 172.
Urlesberger, F. C., ‘“Legitimate Reasons’ for the Proprietor of a Trade Mark Registered in the 	EU to Oppose Further Dealings in the Goods After They Have Been Put on the 	Market for the First Time’, (1999) 36 CMLRev 1195.
Carboni, A., ‘Cases Past the Post on Trade Mark Exhaustion: An English Perspective’, (1997) 	EIPR 198.
Laddie, H., ‘National I.P. Rights: a Moribund Anachronism in a Federal Europe’, (2001) 16 	EIPR 402.


















Lecture 5		Conversation with Judge Allan Rosas, 
			European Court of Justice 	


Judge Allan Rosas will visit the City Law School, will talk to you about the Court of Justice, and will answer questions. 

Judge Rosas has been a Judge at the Court since 17 January 2002. 

He was Professor of Law at the University of Turku (1978-81) and at the Åbo Akademi University (Turku/Åbo) (1981-96) and Director of the latter's Institute for Human Rights (1985-95). He represented the Finnish Government as member of, or adviser to, Finnish delegations at various international conferences and meetings (including the United Nations, Unesco, OSCE (CSCE) and the Council of Europe). From 1995, He was Principal Legal Adviser at the Legal Service of the European Commission, in charge of external relations. In March 2001, he became Deputy Director-General of the European Commission Legal Service. 

He is the author of numerous articles and the co-author of EU Constitutional Law – An Introduction 2nd ed (Hart Publishing, 2012)






















Lecture 6 	HARMONIZATION AND FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS  

MAIN READING

Craig and de Burca, Chapter 17.

***	The process of market integration

- Sir Leon Brittan, ex Member of the European Commission (JUSTICE, 7 July 1989):
 
“Why was the 1992 process necessary in the first place. Really, in a way, it was necessary because of the recognition that the prescriptions of the Treaty of Rome had not been fully fulfilled. The idea of a single European market in which there would be freedom of goods and services had manifestly not been created by the early 1980s, and although there was freedom of physical goods, the unseen barriers to trade were so substantial that you could not say that we had created a single Common Market. That perception was allied with the further perception that in order to achieve that progress towards a genuine single market, it was necessary for there to be constitutional change in the Community, because as long as all decisions had to be taken by unanimity, in practice, if not in strict theory, it was impossible to remove the non-tariff barriers, whether in public procurement, whether through the abuse of standards, whatever their nature, towards the creation of a genuine single market. And so, alongside the programme of 1992, went the Single European Act and the constitutional changes, giving greater power to the European Parliament, and the ability for decisions to be taken in many, if not all, areas by qualified majority vote. It was that that provided the impetus to 1992.” 

- Lord Cockfield, ex Member of the European Commission (speech on 22 February 1988):

“The internal market is not an area where frontier controls have merely been simplified or are retained for this reason or that: but an area without internal frontiers”. 

- Chalmers, D., ‘The Single Market: From Prima Donna to Journeyman’ in Shaw, J. and More, F., New Legal Dynamics of European Union (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995) 55: 

‘For a lawyer the principal dilemma posed by the single market is that it is a concept whose outer limits require constant redefinition’.
- Article 115 TFEU: 
	Without prejudice to Article 114, the Council shall, acting unanimously in accordance 	with a special legislative procedure and after consulting the European Parliament and 	the Economic and Social Committee, issue directives for the approximation of such 	laws, regulations or administrative provisions of the Member States as directly affect 	the establishment or functioning of the internal market.
- Case 120/78 Cassis de Dijon [1979] ECR 649

- Communication by the Commission concerning the consequences of the judgment in 
Cassis de Dijon [1980] OJ C 256/2.

***	Article 114 TFEU: function and limits

- COM(85) 310 fin. - Commission White Paper on Completing the Internal Market

- Article 114 (1)-(4) TFEU: 
	
	1.	Save where otherwise provided in the Treaties, the following provisions shall 	apply for the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 26. The European 	Parliament and the Council shall, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative 	procedure and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee, adopt the 	measures for the approximation of the provisions laid down by law, regulation or 	administrative action in Member States which have as their object the establishment 	and functioning of the internal market.

	2.	Paragraph 1 shall not apply to fiscal provisions, to those relating to the free 	movement of persons nor to those relating to the rights and interests of employed 	persons.
	
	3.	The Commission, in its proposals envisaged in paragraph 1 concerning 	health, safety, environmental protection and consumer protection, will take as a base 	a high level of protection, taking account in particular of any new development based 	on scientific facts. Within their respective powers, the European Parliament and the 	Council will also seek to achieve this objective.

	4.	If, after the adoption of a harmonisation measure by the European Parliament 	and the Council, by the Council or by the Commission, a Member State deems it 	necessary to maintain national provisions on grounds of major needs referred to in 	Article 36, or relating to the protection of the environment or the working environment, 	it shall notify the Commission of these provisions as well as the grounds for 	maintaining them.

- *Case C-376/98 Germany v European Parliament and Council (re: Tobacco Advertising), 
[2000] ECR I-2247

- Case C-491/01 Imperial Tobacco [2002] ECR I-11453

- Case C-210/03 Secretary of State for Health (re: Swedish Match), [2004] ECR I-11893

- Case C-380/03 Germany v Parliament and Council (Tobacco Advertising II) [2006] ECR I-11573

***	Article 114(5) TFEU: striking the balance between national and EU powers

- Article 114(5)-(6) TFEU (added at Amsterdam):

5. Moreover, without prejudice to paragraph 4, if, after the adoption of a harmonization measure by the European Parliament and the Council, by the Council or by the Commission, a Member State deems it necessary to introduce national provisions based on new scientific evidence relating to the protection of the environment or the working environment on grounds of a problem specific to that Member State arising after the adoption of the harmonisation measure, it shall notify the Commission of the envisaged provisions as well as the grounds for introducing them.

6.	The Commission shall, within six months of the notifications as referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5, approve or reject the national provisions involved after having verified whether or not they are a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States and whether or not they shall constitute an obstacle to the functioning of the internal market.
In the absence of a decision by the Commission within this period the national provisions referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 shall be deemed to have been approved.
When justified by the complexity of the matter and in the absence of danger for human health, the Commission may notify the Member State concerned that the period referred to in this paragraph may be extended for a further period of up to six months.

- C-439/05 P and C-454/05 P Land Oberösterreich and Austria v Commission [2007] ECR I-7141.

***	When to harmonise? The case of tobacco advertising

a. Directive 98/43 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco product [1998] OJ L 213/9.  

Case C-376/98 Germany v European Parliament and Council (Tobacco Advertising) [2000] ECR I-8419:

83. Those provisions, read together, make it clear that the measures referred to in Article 100a(1) of the Treaty are intended to improve the conditions for the establishment and functioning of the internal market. To construe that article as meaning that it vests in the Community legislature a general power to regulate the internal market would not only be contrary to the express wording of the provisions cited above but would also be incompatible with the principle embodied in Article 3b of the EC Treaty (now Article 5 EC) that the powers of the Community are limited to those specifically conferred on it.

84. Moreover, a measure adopted on the basis of Article 100a of the Treaty must genuinely have as its object the improvement of the conditions for the establishment and functioning of the internal market. If a mere finding of disparities between national rules and of the abstract risk of obstacles to the exercise of fundamental freedoms or of distortions of competition liable to result therefrom were sufficient to justify the choice of Article 100a as a legal basis, judicial review of compliance with the proper legal basis might be rendered nugatory. The Court would then be prevented from discharging the function entrusted to it by Article 164 of the EC Treaty (now Article 220 EC) of ensuring that the law is observed in the interpretation and application of the Treaty.

b. Directive 2001/37 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products:

‘several Member States indicated that, if measures establishing maximum carbon monoxide yields for cigarettes are not adopted at Community level, they will adopt such measures at national level. Differences in rules concerning carbon monoxide are likely to constitute barriers to trade and to impede the smooth operation of the internal market’.

Case C-491/01 British American Tobacco [2002] ECR I-11453:

Case C-210/03 Swedish Match [2004] ECR I-11893:

‘48. … the Community legislature must be allowed a broad discretion in an area such as that concerned in the present case, which involves political, economic and social choices on its part, and in which it is called on to undertake complex assessments. Only if a measure adopted in this field is manifestly inappropriate in relation to the objective which the competent institutions are seeking to pursue can the lawfulness of 


c. Directive 2003/33 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products [2003] OJ L 152/16.

Case C-380/03 Germany v European Parliament and Council [2006] ECR I-11573:

’80. Recourse to Article [114 TFEU] as a legal basis does not presuppose the existence of an actual link with free movement between the Member States in every situation covered by the measure founded on that basis. As the Court has previously pointed out, to justify recourse to Article [114 TFEU] as the legal basis what matters is that the measure adopted on that basis must actually be intended to improve the conditions for the establishment and functioning of the internal market’.

***	‘Old’ approaches to harmonisation 
- Article 115 TFEU
- Case 120/78 Cassis de Dijon [1979] ECR 649

***	New Approach to technical harmonisation 

-	Council Resolution on a new approach to technical harmonization and standards, [1985] OJ C 136/1: Annex, ‘Guidelines for a New Approach to Technical Harmonization and Standards’

- Council Directive 2009/48/EC on the safety of toys [2009] OJ L 170/1.


***	Technical standards 

-	Council Directive 83/189/EEC Standstill Directive on Standards, [1983] OJ L 109/8

-	Case C-194/94 CIA Security v Signalson [1996] ECR I-2201

-	Case C-443/98 Unilever [2000] ECR I-7535


Reading list 

Chalmers, Davies, Monti, Chapter 15.
Barnard, Ch. 16.
Snell, ‘The internal market and the philosophies of market integration’ in Barnard and Peers
 (eds), European Union Law (OUP, 2014) Ch. 11.
Dougan, ‘Minimum Harmonization and the Internal Market’ (2000) 37 CMLRev 853
Majone, G., Dilemmas of European Integration: The Ambiguities and Pitfalls of Integration by 
Stealth (OUP 2005) – dealing with a topic wider than that discussed in this lecture, this interesting book puts forward a critique of the model of European integration so far. For those interested, see the critique by Dougan, M., ‘”And some fell on stony ground…” A review of Giandomenico Majone’s Dilemmas of European Integration’ (2006) 31 ELRev 865, as well as Majone’s response, entitled ‘Legitimacy and effectiveness: a response to Professor Michael Dougan’s review article on Dilemmas of European Integration, (2007) 32 ELRev 70. 
De Witte, 'A competence to protect: The pursuit of non-market aims through internal market 	legislation' in Syrpis (ed.), The Judiciary, the Legislature and the EU Internal Market 	(Cambridge: CUP, 2012) 25.
Gormley, 'Free movement of goods and EU legislation in the Court of Justice' in Syrpis, above 	at 49.
Ludwigs, annotation on Tobacco Advertising II, (2007) 44 CMLRev 1159.
Chalmers, D., ‘The Single Market: From Prima Donna to Journeyman’ in Shaw, J. 
	and More, G. (eds), Mew Legal Dynamics of European Union (Oxford: 
	Clarendon Press, 1995) 55. 
Pelkmans, ‘The New Approach to Technical Harmonization and Standardization’ (1987)   	JCMS 249
Armstrong, K. and Bulmer, S., The governance of the Single European Market 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1998). 
Weatherill, S., ‘Regulating the Internal Market’, (1992) 17 ELRev 299.McGee and Weatherill, 	‘The Evolution of the Single Market – Harmonization or Liberalization’ (1990) 53 MLR 	578
Editorial Comments, ‘Taking (the limits of) competences seriously’ (2000) 37 CMLRev 1301
Weatherill, ‘Supply of and demand for internal market regulation: strategies, preferences and 	interpretation’ in Nic Shiubhne (ed) Regulating the Internal Market (Edward Elgar, 	Cheltenham, 2006)
Kumm, ‘Constitutionalising Subsidiarity in Integrated Markets: The Case of Tobacco 	Regulation in the European Union’ (2006) 12 ELJ 503
Reich, N., ‘Competition Between Legal Orders – A New Paradigm of EC Law?’, 
(1992) 29 CMLRev 861.	
Weatherill, S., ‘Breach of directives and breach of contract’, (2001) 26 ELRev 177.
Jans, J.H., ‘National Legislative Authority? The Procedural Constraints of European 
Law’, (1998/1) LIEI 25.
Egan, M., Constructing a European Market (Oxford: OUP, 2001).
Weatherill, S., ‘Pre-emption, Harmonisation and the Distribution of Competence to 
	Regulate the internal Market’ in Barnard, C. and Scott, J. (eds), The Law of the 
	Single European Market – Unpacking the Premises (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 
	2002) 41.   
Tridimas, G. and Tridimas, T., ‘The European Court of Justice and the Annulment of 
	the Tobacco Advertising Directive: Friend of National Sovereignty or Foe of 
	Public Health?’, (2002) 14 European Journal of Law and Economics 171.
Wyatt, ‘Community Competence to Regulate the Internal Market’ in M Dougan and S Currie
(eds), 50 Years of the European Treaties: Looking Back and Thinking Forward (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2009) 93. 
Weatherill, ‘The Limits of Legislative Harmonization Ten Years after Tobacco Advertising:
How the Court’s Case Law has become a “Drafting Guide”’, (2011) 12 German Law Journal 827.












Lecture 7  			Free movement of persons I

MAIN READING

Craig and de Burca, Ch. 21.

***	Article 45 TFEU 

1. Freedom of movement for workers shall be secured within the Union.

2. Such freedom of movement shall entail the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the Member States as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and employment.

3. It shall entail the right, subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health:

(a) to accept offers of employment actually made; 

(b) to move freely within the territory of Member States for this purpose;

(c) to stay in a Member State for the purpose of employment in accordance with the provisions governing the employment of nationals of that State laid down by law, regulation or administrative action;

(d) to remain in the territory of a Member State after having been employed in that State, subject to conditions which shall be embodied in implementing regulations to be drawn up by the Commission.

4. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to employment in the public service.

***	Secondary legislation 

- Directive 2004/38 [2004] OJ L 158/77 (“Citizens’ Rights Directive”) ([2004] OJ L 229/35) (effective since 30/4/2006)

- Regulation 1612/68 [1968] Sp. Ed. OJ L 257/475; repealed by Regulation 492/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2011 of freedom of movement or workers within the Union [2011] OJ L 141/1 (effective since 16/06/2011)

- Regulation 1408/71 [1971] Sp. Ed. OJ L 149/416; repealed by Regulation 883/2004 [2004] OJ L166/1 (on social security systems) since 01/05/2010

***	Effect of Article 45 TFEU 

Case 36/74 Walrave [1974] ECR 1405:

17. Prohibition of such discrimination does not only apply to the action of public authorities but extends likewise to rules of any other nature aimed at regulating in a collective manner gainful employment and the provision of services.

19. Since, moreover, working conditions in the various Member States are governed sometimes by means of provisions laid down by law or regulations and sometimes by agreements and other acts concluded or adopted by private persons, to limit the prohibitions in question to acts of a public authority would risk creating inequality in their application.

Case C-415/93, Bosman [1995] ECR I-4921.

Case C-281/98 Angonese [2000] ECR I-4139:

30. It should be noted at the outset that the principle of non-discrimination set out in Article 48 is drafted in general terms and is not specifically addressed to the Member States.
… 
35. Such considerations must, a fortiori, be applicable to Article [45] … which lays down a fundamental freedom and which constitutes a specific application of the general prohibition of discrimination contained in Article 6. In that respect, like Article 119 … it is designed to ensure that there is no discrimination on the labour market. 

36. Consequently, the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality laid down in Article 48 … must be regarded as applying to private persons as well.  

***	Scope of Article 45 TFEU

Case C-214/94, Boukhalfa [1996] ECR I-2253: 

“15. The Court has consistently held that provisions of Community law may apply to professional activities pursued outside Community territory as long as the employment relationship retains a sufficiently close link with the Community. … That principle must be deemed to extend also to cases in which there is a sufficiently close link between the employment relationship, on the one hand, and the law of a Member State and thus the relevant rules of Community law, on the other.

22. … the prohibition of discrimination based on nationality, laid down in Article [45](2) of the Treaty … applies to a national of a Member State who is permanently resident in a non-member country, who is employed by another Member State in its embassy in that non-member country and whose contract of employment was entered into and is permanently performed there, as regards all aspects of the employment relationship which are governed by the legislation of the employing Member State.”

***	Definition of a worker

Case 53/81 Levin [1982] ECR 1035: 

11. … the terms “worker” and “activity as an employed person” may not be defined by reference to the national laws of the Member States but have a Community meaning…

12 … the meaning and the scope of the terms “worker” and “activity as an employed person” should thus be clarified in the light of the principles of the legal order of the Community.”

13. … in this respect it must be stressed that these concepts define the field of application of one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty and, as such, may not be interpreted restrictively.
………..
17… whilst part-time employment is not excluded from the field of application of the rules on freedom of movement for worker, those rules cover only the pursuit of effective and genuine activities, to the exclusion of activities on such a small scale as to be regarded as purely marginal and ancillary . ….

-Unpacking the definition: three elements 

Case 66/85, Lawrie-Blum [1986] ECR 2121:

17-18. …during the entire period of preparatory service the trainee teacher is under the direction and supervision of the school to which he is assigned. It is the school that determines the services to be performed by him and his working hours and it is the school’s instructions that he must carry out and its rules that he must observe. During a substantial part of the preparatory service he is required to give lessons to the school’s pupils and thus provides a service of some economic value to the school. The amounts which he receives may be regarded as remuneration for the services provided and for the duties involved in completing the period of preparatory service. Consequently, the three criteria for the existence of an employment relationship are fulfilled in this case.

Case C-176/96, Lehtonen [2000] ECR I-2681:

45. … The essential feature of an employment relationship is that for a certain period of time a person performs services for and under the direction of another person, in return for which he receives remuneration. …” 

 - Difficulty of applying the definition: the role of national courts

Case C-3/90, Bernini [1992] ECR I-1071:  

15. … a person engaged in preparatory training in the course of occupational training must be regarded as a worker if the training period is completed under the conditions of genuine and effective activity as an employed person.

16. That conclusion cannot be invalidated by the fact that the trainee’s productivity is low, that he works only a small number of hours per week and, consequently, receives limited remuneration. … However, since a training period completed in the context of occupational training is intended above all to develop occupational aptitude, the national court is entitled, when assessing the genuine and effective nature of the services in question, to examine whether in all the circumstances the person concerned has completed a sufficient number of hours in order to familiarize himself with the work.

Case C-337/97, Meeusen [1999] ECR I-3289:

13 …  Any person who pursues activities which are effective and genuine, to the exclusion of activities on such a small scale as to be regarded as purely marginal and ancillary, must be regarded as a ‘worker’. …

17. The fact that that person is related by marriage to the director and sole owner of the undertaking is not, of itself, such as to affect that classification.”

- Level of remuneration? 

Case 139/85 Kempf [1986] ECR 1741:

14-15. … the rules on [the free movement of workers] must be interpreted as meaning that a person in effective and genuine part-time employment cannot be excluded from their sphere of application merely because the remuneration he derives from it is below the level of the minimum means of subsistence and he seeks to supplement it by other lawful means of subsistence. In that regard it is irrelevant whether those supplementary means of subsistence are derived from property or from the employment of a member of his family, …, or whether, … they are obtained from financial assistance drawn from the public funds of the Member State in which he resides, provided that the effective and genuine nature of his work is established.”

Case 196/87 Steymann [1988] ECR 6159:

14. … activities performed by members of a community based on religion or another form of philosophy as part of the commercial activities of that community constitute economic activities in so far as the services which the community provides to its members may be regarded as the indirect quid pro quo for genuine and effective work.”

- Indication of purely marginal and ancillary activities

Case C-357/89, Raulin [1992] ECR I-1027:

11. …  a worker employed under [an on call] contract is not precluded by reason of his conditions of employment from being regarded as a worker within the meaning of Article [45] of the … Treaty.

13. … whilst part-time work is not excluded from the field of application of the rules on freedom of movement for workers, those cover only the pursuit of effective and genuine activities, to the exclusion of activities on such a small scale as to be regarded as purely marginal and ancillary. … 

15. The national court may, however, when assessing the effective and genuine nature of the activity in question, take account of the irregular nature and limited duration of the services actually performed under a contract for occasional employment. The fact that the person concerned worked only a very limited number of hours in a labour relationship may be an indication that the activities exercised are purely marginal and ancillary. The national court may also take account, if appropriate, of the fact that the person must remain available to work if called upon to do so by the employer.”

	- Does the purpose of the activity matter?

Case C-344/87, Bettray [1989] ECR 1621:

17. However, work under the Social Employment Law cannot be regarded as an effective and genuine economic activity if it constitutes merely a means of rehabilitation or reintegration for the persons concerned and the purpose of the paid employment, which is adapted to the physical and mental possibilities of each person, is to enable those persons sooner or later to recover their capacity to take up ordinary employment or to lead as normal as possible a life.

19. … persons employed under the Social Employment Law are not selected on the basis of their capacity to perform a certain activity; on the contrary, it is the activities which are chosen in the light of the capabilities of the persons who are going to perform them in order to maintain, re-establish or develop their capacity for work. Finally, the activities involved are pursued in the framework of undertakings or work associations created solely for that purpose by local authorities.”

***	The right to look for a job 

Case C-292/89, Antonissen [1991] ECR I-745:

13. …the free movement of workers … also entails the right for nationals of Member States to move freely within the territory of the other Member States and to stay there for the purposes of seeking employment.

16. … the effectiveness of Article [45 TFEU] is secured in so far as Community legislation or, in its absence, the legislation of a Member State gives persons concerned a reasonable time in which to apprise themselves, in the territory of the Member State concerned, of offers of employment corresponding to their occupational qualifications and to take, where appropriate, the necessary steps in order to be engaged.

21. In the absence of a Community provision prescribing the period during which Community nationals seeking employment in a Member State may stay there, a period of six months, such as that as laid down in the national legislation…, does not appear in principle to be insufficient to enable the persons concerned to apprise themselves, in the host Member State, of offers of employment corresponding to their occupational qualifications and to take, where appropriate, the necessary steps in order to be engaged …. However, if after the expiry of that period the person concerned provides evidence that he is continuing to seek employment and that he has genuine chances of being engaged, he cannot be required to leave the territory of the host Member State.”

Case 316/85, Lebon [1987] ECR 2811:

26. … the right to equal treatment with regard to social and tax advantages applies only to workers. Those who move in search of employment qualify for equal treatment only as regards access to employment in accordance with article [45 TFEU] ….

27. … the equal treatment with regard to social and tax advantages which is laid down by article 7(2) of Regulation No 1612/68 [now Regulation 492/2011] operates only for the benefit of workers and does not apply to nationals of Member states who move in search of employment.


***	Right to Equal Treatment 

Article 7 of Regulation 492/2011 on freedom of movement for workers within the Union

1.	A worker who is a national of a Member State may not, in the territory of another Member State, be treated differently from national workers by reason of his nationality in respect of any conditions of employment and work, in particular as regards remuneration, dismissal, and, should he become unemployed, reinstatement or re-employment.

2.	He shall enjoy the same social and tax advantages as national workers.

3.	He shall also, by virtue of the same right and under the same conditions as national workers, have access to training in vocational schools and retraining centres. 

4.	Any clause of a collective or individual agreement or any other collective regulation concerning eligibility for employment, remuneration and other conditions of work or dismissal shall be null and void in so far as it lays down or authorises discriminatory conditions in respect of workers who are nationals of the other Member States. 

(a) Access to Employment 

(b) Working Conditions 

(c) Social and Tax advantages 
 

***	Restrictions on free movement: direct discrimination 

Case 53/81, Levin [1982] ECR 1035:

7 … That freedom [of movement for workers] is to entail the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the Member States as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and is to include the right, subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health, to accept offers of employment actually made, to move freely within the territory of Member States for this purpose, to stay in a Member State for the purpose of employment and to remain there after the termination of that employment.”

***	Restrictions on free movement: indirect discrimination 

Case C-379/87, Groener [1989] ECR I-3967:

12. … Article 3(1) of Reg. No 1612/68 [now Art. 3(1)(b) Reg. 492/2011] provides that national provisions or administrative practices of a Member State are not to apply where, “though applicable irrespective of nationality, their exclusive or principal aim or effect is to keep nationals of other Member States away from the employment offered”. The last subparagraph of Article 3(1) provides that that provision is not to “apply to conditions relating to linguistic knowledge required by reason of the nature of the post to be filled”.

13. … the obligation to prove a knowledge of the Irish language imposed by the national provisions in question applies without distinction to Irish and other Community nationals, except as regards the exemptions which may be allowed for nationals of other Member States”.

Case C-281/98, Angonese [2000] ECR I-4139:

37 … whether a requirement imposed by an employer …, which makes admission to a recruitment competition conditional on possession of one particular diploma, … constitutes discrimination contrary to Article [45] of the Treaty.

38 … the Cassa di Risparmio accepts only the Certificate as evidence of the requisite linguistic knowledge and the Certificate can be obtained only in one province of the Member State concerned.

39 Persons not resident in that province therefore have little chance of acquiring the Certificate and it will be difficult, or even impossible, for them to gain access to the employment in question.

40 Since the majority of residents of the province of Bolzano are Italian nationals, the obligation to obtain the requisite Certificate puts nationals of other Member States at a disadvantage by comparison with residents of the province.

41 That is so notwithstanding that the requirement in question affects Italian nationals resident in other parts of Italy as well as nationals of other Member States. …

***	Restrictions on free movement: indistinctly applicable measures 

Case C-415/93, Bosman [1995] ECR I-4921:
	
103. … although the rules … apply also to transfers between clubs belonging to different national associations within the same Member State and are similar to those governing transfers between clubs belonging to the same national association, they still directly affect players’ access to the employment market in other Member States and are thus capable of impeding freedom of movement for workers. …

104. Consequently, the transfer rules constitute an obstacle to freedom of movement for workers prohibited in principle by Article [45] of the Treaty. …”
	………….
117. Article [45(2) TFEU] expressly provides that freedom of movement for workers entails the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the Member States as regards employment, remuneration and conditions of work and employment.
	……………
119. The same principle applies to clauses contained in the regulations of sporting associations which restrict the right of nationals of other Member States to take part, as professional players, in football matches ….

120. The fact that those clauses concern not the employment of such players, on which there is no restriction, but the extent to which their clubs may field them in official matches is irrelevant. In so far as participation in such matches is the essential purpose of a professional player’s activity, a rule which restricts that participation obviously also restricts the chances of employment of the player concerned.

Case C-176/96, Lehtonen [2000] ECR I-2681:

48. It is true that stricter transfer deadlines apply to players coming from other [national] basketball clubs.

49 Those rules are nevertheless liable to restrict the freedom of movement of players who wish to pursue their activity in another Member State, by preventing [national] clubs from fielding in championship matches basketball players from other Member States where they have been engaged after a specified date. Those rules consequently constitute an obstacle to freedom of movement for workers ….

50 The fact that the rules in question concern not the employment of such players, on which there is no restriction, but the extent to which their clubs may field them in official matches is irrelevant. In so far as participation in such matches is the essential purpose of a professional player’s activity, a rule which restricts that participation obviously also restricts the chances of employment of the player concerned ….”

Case C-325/08, Olympique Lyonnais v Olivier Bernard and Newcastle UFC (“Bernard”) [2010] ECR I-2177: 

35. Rules ... , according to which a “joueur espoir” [ie a promising young football player who is employed by a professional football club under a fixed-term training contract], at the end of his training period, is required, under pain of being sued for damages, to sign a professional contract with the club which trained him are likely to discourage that player from exercising his right of free movement.

36. Even though ... such rules do not formally prevent the player from signing a professional contract with a club in another Member State, it none the less make the exercise of that right less attractive.

Case C-109/04, Kranemann [2005] ECR I-2421:

26. Provisions which preclude or deter a national of a Member State from leaving his country of origin in order to exercise his right to freedom of movement therefore constitute an obstacle to that freedom even if they apply without regard to the nationality of the workers concerned ….

27. It follows that, where a Member State provides for a system of access to certain jobs based on a preparatory period of practical training during which trainees carry out genuine and effective activity as an employed person and where it also allows a trainee to undergo such training in another Member State, it must ensure that the detailed rules for the organisation of such training do not create restrictions of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty.

28. Where national legislation … requires trainees undergoing their practical training in another Member State to bear the travel expenses relating to the stretches of the journey outside their home country themselves, including the cost of a trip home during the period of training, a trainee undergoing his practical training in another Member State is in a worse position than he would be if he trained in his Member State of origin because in that case his travel expenses would have been paid.

29. Thus such legislation creates a financial obstacle which may deter trainee lawyers, particularly those with limited financial resources, from taking up a traineeship in another Member State ….

***	Measures beyond the scope of Article 45 TFEU

Case C-190/98, Graf [2000] ECR I-493:

24. … the entitlement to compensation was not dependent on the worker’s choosing whether or not to stay with his current employer, but on a future and hypothetical event, namely the subsequent termination of his contract without such termination being at his own initiative or attributable to him. 

25. … too uncertain and indirect a possibility for that legislation to be capable of being regarded as liable to hinder freedom of movement for workers.

***	Justification of directly discriminatory restrictions on free movement of workers

-Article 45(3) TFEU: 

It shall entail the right, subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health:
……….

Directive 2004/38, Articles 27-33.
		
Article 27

1. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member States may restrict the freedom of movement and residence of Union citizens and their family members, irrespective of nationality, on grounds of public policy, public security or public health. These grounds shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.

2. Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public security shall comply with the principle of proportionality and shall be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual concerned.

Previous criminal convictions shall not in themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures.

The personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. Justifications that are isolated from the particulars of the case or that rely on considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted.

3. In order to ascertain whether the person concerned represents a danger for public policy or public security, when issuing the registration certificate or, in the absence of a registration system, not later than three months from the date of arrival of the person concerned on its territory or from the date of reporting his/her presence within the territory, as provided for in Article 5(5), or when issuing the residence card, the host Member State may, should it consider this essential, request the Member State of origin and, if need be, other Member States to provide information concerning any previous police record the person concerned may have. Such enquiries shall not be made as a matter of routine. The Member State consulted shall give its reply within two months.

4. The Member State which issued the passport or identity card shall allow the holder of the document who has been expelled on grounds of public policy, public security, or public health from another Member State to re-enter its territory without any formality even if the document is no longer valid or the nationality of the holder is in dispute.

Case 67/74 Bonsignore [1975] ECR 297:

6. Reliance by a national authority upon the concept of public policy presupposes … the existence of a genuine and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

Case 41/74, van Duyn [1994] ECR 1337:

17. … [a person’s] present association, which reflects participation in the activities of the body or of the organization as well as identification with its aims and its designs, may be considered a voluntary act of the person concerned and, consequently, as part of his personal conduct ….

18. … [As regards] the problem of what importance must be attributed to the fact that the activities of the organization in question, which are considered by the Member State as contrary to the public good are not however prohibited by national law, …. the concept of public policy … must be interpreted strictly …. Nevertheless, the particular circumstances justifying recourse to the concept of public policy may vary from one country to another and from one period to another, and it is therefore necessary in this matter to allow the competent national authorities an area of discretion within the limits imposed by the Treaty.

19. It follows … that where the competent authorities of a Member State have clearly defined their standpoint as regards the activities of a particular organization and where, considering it to be socially harmful, they have taken administrative measures to counteract these activities, the Member State cannot be required, before it can rely on the concept of public policy, to make such activities unlawful, if recourse to such a measure is not thought appropriate in the circumstances.

24. … a Member State, in imposing restrictions justified on grounds of public policy, is entitled to take into account, as a matter of personal conduct of the individual concerned, the fact that the individual is associated with some body or organization the activities of which the Member State considers socially harmful but which are not unlawful in that State, despite the fact that no restriction is placed upon nationals of the said Member State who wish to take similar employment with these same bodies or organizations.”

Joined Cases 115-116/81, Adoui and Cornuaille [1982] ECR 1665:

“6. … prostitution as such is not prohibited by Belgian legislation, although the law does prohibit certain incidental activities, which are particularly harmful from the social point of view, such as the exploitation of prostitution by third parties and various forms of incitement to debauchery.

8. … Although Community law does not impose upon the Member States a uniform scale of values as regards the assessment of conduct which may be considered as contrary to public policy, it should nevertheless be stated that conduct may not be considered as being of a sufficiently serious nature to justify restrictions on the admission to or residence within the territory of a Member State of a national of another Member State in a case where the former Member State does not adopt, with respect to the same conduct on the part of its own nationals repressive measures or other genuine and effective measures intended to combat such conduct.

9. … a Member State may not, by virtue of the reservation relating to public policy contained in Articles [45] and [52] of the Treaty, expel a national of another Member State from its territory or refuse him access to its territory by reason of conduct which, when attributable to the former State’s own nationals, does not give rise to repressive measures or other genuine and effective measures intended to combat such conduct.

- Article 45(4) TFEU: 

The provisions of this Article shall not apply to employment in the public service.

Case 149/79, Commission v Belgium I [1980] 3881:

10. It covers posts which involve direct or indirect participation in the exercise of powers conferred by public law and duties designed to safeguard the general interests of the State or of other public authorities and thus presume on the part of those occupying them the existence of a special relationship of allegiance to the State and reciprocity of rights and duties which form the foundation of the bond of nationality.

***	Justification of indistinctly applicable measures 

Case C-379/87 Groener [1989] ECR I-3967:

15… the teaching of art, like that of most other subjects taught in public vocational education schools, is conducted essentially or indeed exclusively in the English language. It follows that … knowledge of the Irish language is not required for the performance of the duties which teaching of the kind at issue specifically entails.

16 However, that finding is not in itself sufficient to enable the national court to decide whether the linguistic requirement in question is justified “by reason of the nature of the post to be filled”, within the meaning of … Article 3(1) of Reg. 1612/68 [now Reg. 492/2011].

17. … regard must be had to the special linguistic situation in Ireland. …

18. … although Irish is not spoken by the whole Irish population, the policy followed by Irish governments … has been designed not only to maintain but also to promote the use of Irish as a means of expressing national identity and culture. …

19. The … Treaty does not prohibit the adoption of a policy for the protection and promotion of a language of a Member State which is both the national language and the first official language. However, the implementation of such a policy must not encroach upon a fundamental freedom such as that of the free movement of workers. Therefore, the requirements deriving from measures intended to implement such a policy must not in any circumstances be disproportionate in relation to the aim pursued and the manner in which they are applied must not bring about discrimination against nationals of other Member States.

20. The importance of education for the implementation of such a policy must be recognized. Teachers have an essential role to play, not only through the teaching which they provide but also by their participation in the daily life of the school and the privileged relationship which they have with their pupils. In those circumstances, it is not unreasonable to require them to have some knowledge of the first national language.

21. The requirement imposed on teachers to have an adequate knowledge of such a language must, provided that the level of knowledge required is not disproportionate in relation to the objective pursued, be regarded as a condition corresponding to the knowledge required by reason of the nature of the post to be filled within the meaning of … Article 3(1) of Regulation No 1612/68 [now Reg. 492/2011].

23. Moreover, the principle of non-discrimination precludes the imposition of any requirement that the linguistic knowledge in question must have been acquired within the national territory. It also implies that the nationals of other Member States should have an opportunity to retake the oral examination, in the event of their having previously failed it, when they again apply for a post of assistant lecturer or lecturer.

Case C-109/04 Kranemann [2005] ECR I-2421:

33. … a measure which constitutes an obstacle to freedom of movement for workers could be accepted only if it pursued a legitimate aim compatible with the Treaty and were justified by pressing reasons of public interest. But even if that were so, application of that measure would still have to be such as to ensure achievement of the aim in question and not go beyond what is necessary for that purpose …. 

34. …aims of a purely economic nature cannot constitute pressing reasons of public interest justifying a restriction of a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty …. 

35. In any event, … it is not inconceivable that, in certain cases, the cost of a journey made within Germany might be greater than that of a journey to another Member State.


READING LIST 

Chalmers, Davies and Monti, Ch 19 (this examines freedom of establishment too, which we shall cover later in the course).
Barnard, Ch. 9.
Wyatt and Dashwood’s EU Law, Ch. 16.
Barnard, ‘Free Movement of natural persons’ in Barnard and Peers (eds), European Union 
	Law (OUP, 2014) Ch. 13.
O’Leary, ‘Free Movement of Persons and Services’ in Craig and de Burca, Evolution of EU 
	Law (OUP, 2011, 2nd ed) 499.
O’Brien, ‘Social Blind Spots and Monocular Policy Making: the ECJ’s Migrant Worker Model’, 
	(2009) 46 CMLRev 1107.
Tryfonidou, ‘In Search of the Aim of the EC Free Movement of Persons Provisions: Has the 
	Court of Justice Missed the Point?’, (2009) 46 CMLRev 1591.
Hlison, ‘The Unpatriotism of the Economic Constitution? Rights to Free Movement and their 
	Impact on National and European Identity’, (2008) 14 ELJ 186
































Lecture 8 	Free movement of persons II

MAIN READING

Craig and de Burca, Ch. 23. 

***	The notion of EU citizenship

Article 18 TFEU (Principle of Non-Discrimination)

Within the scope of application of the Treaties, and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein, any discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.

The European Parliament and the Council, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, may adopt rules designed to prohibit such discrimination.

***	Article 20 TFEU

1. Citizenship of the Union is hereby established. Every person holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen of the Union. Citizenship of the Union shall be additional to and not replace national citizenship.

2. Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be subject to the duties provided for in the Treaties. They shall have, inter alia:

(a) the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States;

…

These rights shall be exercised in accordance with the conditions and limits defined by the Treaties and by the measures adopted thereunder.

***	Article 21 TFEU

1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject to the limitations and conditions laid down in the Treaties and by the measures adopted to give them effect.

2. If action by the Union should prove necessary to attain this objective and the Treaties have not provided the necessary powers, the European Parliament and the Council, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, may adopt provisions with a view to facilitating the exercise of the rights referred to in paragraph 1.

3. For the same purposes as those referred to in paragraph 1 and if the Treaties have not provided the necessary powers, the Council, acting in accordance with a special legislative procedure, may adopt measures concerning social security or social protection. The Council shall act unanimously after consulting the European Parliament.

Case C-413/99 Baumbast [2002] ECR I-7091:

83. The Treaty … does not require that citizens of the Union pursue a professional or trade activity, whether as an employed or self-employed person, in order to enjoy the rights provided in Part Two of the EC Treaty on citizenship of the Union. Furthermore, there is nothing in the text of that Treaty to permit the conclusion that citizens of the Union who have established themselves in another Member State in order to carry on an activity as an employed person there are deprived, where that activity comes to an end, of the rights which are conferred on them by the EC Treaty by virtue of that citizenship.
84. As regards, in particular, the right to reside within the territory of the Member States under Article [21(1) TFEU], that right is conferred directly on every citizen of the Union by a clear and precise provision of the EC Treaty. Purely as a national of a Member State, and consequently a citizen of the Union, Mr Baumbast therefore has the right to rely on Article [21(1) TFEU].

Case C-184/99, Grzelczyk [2001] ECR I-6193:

31. Union citizenship is destined to be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member States, enabling those who find themselves in the same situation to enjoy the same treatment in law irrespective of their nationality, subject to such exceptions as are expressly provided for.

32. [A] citizen of the European Union, lawfully resident in the territory of a host Member State, can rely on Article [18] of the Treaty in all situations which fall within the scope ratione materiae of Community law.

33. Those situations include those involving the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty and those involving the exercise of the right to move and reside freely in another Member State, as conferred by Article [21] of the Treaty.

***	Secondary Legislation Applying to all EU Citizens

 Directive 2004/38 [2004] OJ L 158/77 (“Citizens’ Rights Directive”) ([2004] OJ L 229/35) (effective since 30/4/2006)

***	Personal scope of Directive 2004/38

Article 2

Definitions
For the purposes of this Directive:

(1)	"Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a Member State;

(2)	"Family member" means:

(a) the spouse;

(b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a Member State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage and in accordance with the conditions laid down in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;

(c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

(d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

(3)	"Host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union citizen moves in order to exercise his/her right of free movement and residence.

Article 3
Beneficiaries

1.	This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a national, and to their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them.

2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host Member State shall, in accordance with its national legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:

(a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in the country from which they have come, are dependants or members of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right of residence, or where serious health grounds strictly require the personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;

(b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable relationship, duly attested. The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or residence to these people.

***	Right of temporary residence (3 months to 5 years) 

Directive 2004/38, Article 6
Right of residence for up to three months

1. Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the territory of another Member State for a period of up to three months without any conditions or any formalities other than the requirement to hold a valid identity card or passport.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall also apply to family members in possession of a valid
passport who are not nationals of a Member State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen.

Article 7
Right of residence for more than three months

1. All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the territory of another Member State for a period of longer than three months if they:

(a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member State; or

(b) have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State during their period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or

(c) - are enrolled at a private or public establishment, accredited or financed by the host
Member State on the basis of its legislation or administrative practice, for the principal
purpose of following a course of study, including vocational training; and 

– have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member State and assure the relevant national authority, by means of a declaration or by such equivalent means as
they may choose, that they have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State during their period of residence; or

(d) are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen who satisfies the conditions
referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).

2. The right of residence provided for in paragraph 1 shall extend to family members who are not nationals of a Member State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the host Member State, provided that such Union citizen satisfies the conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen who is no longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the status of worker or self-employed person in the following circumstances:

(a) he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or accident;

(b) he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having been employed for more
than one year and has registered as a job-seeker with the relevant employment office;

(c) he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after completing a fixed-term
employment contract of less than a year or after having become involuntarily unemployed during the first twelve months and has registered as a job-seeker with the relevant
employment office. In this case, the status of worker shall be retained for no less than six
months;

(d) he/she embarks on vocational training. Unless he/she is involuntarily unemployed, the
retention of the status of worker shall require the training to be related to the previous
employment.

4. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1(d) and 2 above, only the spouse, the registered partner provided for in Article 2(2)(b) and dependent children shall have the right of residence as family members of a Union citizen meeting the conditions under 1(c) above. Article 3(2) shall apply to his/her dependent direct relatives in the ascending lines and those of his/her spouse or registered partner.

***	Right of permanent residence (5 years of more)

Directive 2004/38
Articles 16 et seq

Article 16
General rule for Union citizens and their family members

1. Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of five years in the host
Member State shall have the right of permanent residence there. This right shall not be subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.

2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members who are not nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with the Union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period of five years.

3. Continuity of residence shall not be affected by temporary absences not exceeding a total of six months a year, or by absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service, or by one absence of a maximum of twelve consecutive months for important reasons such as pregnancy and childbirth, serious illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in another Member State or a third country.

4. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost only through absence from the host Member State for a period exceeding two consecutive years.

***	Rights of family members 

Case C-200/02, Zhu and Chen [2004] ECR I-9925:

43. According to the case-law of the Court, the status of dependent' member of the family of a holder of a right of residence is the result of a factual situation characterised by the fact that material support for the family member is provided by the holder of the right of residence….

44. [If] the position is exactly the opposite in that the holder of the right of residence is dependent on the national of a non-member country who is her carer and wishes to accompany her …. 

45. … It is clear that enjoyment by a young child of a right of residence necessarily implies that the child is entitled to be accompanied by the person who is his or her primary carer and accordingly that the carer must be in a position to reside with the child in the host Member State for the duration of such residence ….

46. … where … Article [21 TFEU] and [secondary EU law] grant a right to reside for an indefinite period in the host Member State to a young minor who is a national of another Member State, those same provisions allow a parent who is that minor's primary carer to reside with the child in the host Member State.

***	‘Sufficient resources’ and ‘unreasonable burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State’

Case C-413/99, Baumbast [2002] ECR I-7091:

90 In any event, the limitations and conditions which are referred to in Article 18 EC and laid down by Directive 90/364 are based on the idea that the exercise of the right of residence of citizens of the Union can be subordinated to the legitimate interests of the Member States. In that regard, according to the fourth recital in the preamble to Directive 90/364 beneficiaries of the right of residence must not become an unreasonable burden on the public finances of the host Member State.

91 However, those limitations and conditions must be applied in compliance with the limits imposed by Community law and in accordance with the general principles of that law, in particular the principle of proportionality. That means that national measures adopted on that subject must be necessary and appropriate to attain the objective pursued (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-259/91, C-331/91 and C-332/91 Alluè and Others [1993] ECR I-4309, paragraph 15).

92. In respect of the application of the principle of proportionality …, … [the EU citizen] has sufficient resources …; … worked and therefore lawfully resided in the host Member State for several years …; … during that period his family also resided in the host Member State and remained there even after his activities … in that State came to an end; … neither [he] nor the members of his family have become burdens on the public finances of the host Member State and, … both [he] and his family have comprehensive sickness insurance in another Member State of the Union.

93. Under those circumstances, to refuse to allow [the EU citizen concerned] … to exercise the right of residence which is conferred on him by Article [21(1) TFEU] … on the ground that his sickness insurance does not cover the emergency treatment given in the host Member State would amount to a disproportionate interference with the exercise of that right.”

***	Right to equal treatment

Article 24 of Directive 2004/38
Equal treatment

1. Subject to such specific provisions as are expressly provided for in the Treaty and secondary law, all Union citizens residing on the basis of this Directive in the territory of the host Member State shall enjoy equal treatment with the nationals of that Member State within the scope of the Treaty. The benefit of this right shall be extended to family members who are not nationals of a Member State and who have the right of residence or permanent residence.

2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the host Member State shall not be obliged to confer entitlement to social assistance during the first three months of residence or, where appropriate, the longer period provided for in Article 14(4)(b), nor shall it be obliged, prior to acquisition of the right of permanent residence, to grant maintenance aid for studies, including vocational training, consisting in student grants or student loans to persons other than workers, self-employed persons, persons who retain such status and members of their families.

 - Child raising alowance: 

Case C-85/96, Martinez Sala [1998] ECR I-2691:

57. … the child-raising allowance … indisputably falls within the scope ratione materiae [material scope] of Community law.

60. [It] is not necessary to examine whether the person concerned can rely on [Article 21 TFEU] … since it is common ground that she has already been authorised to reside there ….

61. As a national of a Member State lawfully residing in the territory of another Member State, the appellant … comes within the scope ratione personae [personal scope] of the provisions of the Treaty on European citizenship … 	

62. Article 8(2) of the Treaty attaches to the status of citizen of the Union the rights and duties laid down by the Treaty, including the right, laid down in Article [18 TFEU], not to suffer discrimination on grounds of nationality within the scope of application ratione materiae of the Treaty. 

63. It follows that a citizen of the European Union … lawfully resident in the territory of the host Member State, can rely on [Article 18 TFEU] … in all situations which fall within the scope ratione materiae [material scope] of Community law ….

 - Minimum subsistence allowance: 

  Case C-184/99 Grzelczyk [2001] ECR I-6193

46. … Articles [18] and [20-21 TFEU] preclude entitlement to a non-contributory social benefit, such as the minimex, from being made conditional, in the case of nationals of Member States other than the host State where they are legally resident, on their falling within the scope of Regulation No 1612/68 [now Reg. 492/2011] when no such condition applies to nationals of the host Member State.”

Case C-224/98, D’ Hoop [2002] ECR I-6191:

 39. However, a single condition concerning the place where the diploma of completion of secondary education was obtained is too general and exclusive in nature. It unduly favours an element which is not necessarily representative of the real and effective degree of connection between the applicant for the tideover allowance and the geographic employment market, to the exclusion of all other representative elements. It therefore goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objective pursued.

40. Accordingly … Community law precludes a Member State from refusing to grant the tideover allowance to one of its nationals, a student seeking her first employment, on the sole ground that that student completed her secondary education in another Member State.”

Case C-456/02 Trojani [2004] ECR I-7573

42. First, …. a social assistance benefit such as the minimex falls within the scope of the Treaty ….

43. Second, with regard to such benefits, a citizen of the Union who is not economically active may rely on Article [18 TFEU] where he has been lawfully resident in the host Member State for a certain time or possesses a residence permit.

44. Third, national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, in so far as it does not grant the social assistance benefit to citizens of the European Union, non-nationals of the Member State, who reside there lawfully even though they satisfy the conditions required of nationals of that Member State, constitutes discrimination on grounds of nationality prohibited by Article [18 TFEU].”

 - Student grants: 

Case C-209/03, Bidar [2005] ECR I-2119
 
36. … a national of a Member State who … lives in another Member State where he pursues and completes his secondary education, without it being objected that he does not have sufficient resources or sickness insurance, enjoys a right of residence on the basis of Article [21 TFEU] and [secondary EU law].

42. … the situation of a citizen of the Union who is lawfully resident in another Member State falls within the scope of application of the Treaty within the meaning of [Art. 18 TFEU] for the purposes of obtaining assistance for students, whether in the form of a subsidised loan or a grant, intended to cover his maintenance costs.

48. … assistance, whether in the form of subsidised loans or of grants, provided to students lawfully resident in the host Member State to cover their maintenance costs falls within the scope of application of the Treaty for the purposes of the prohibition of discrimination laid down in the first paragraph of Article [18 TFEU].

58. In the case of assistance covering the maintenance costs of students, it is thus legitimate for a Member State to grant such assistance only to students who have demonstrated a certain degree of integration into the society of that State.

63. … Article [18 TFEU] must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which grants students the right to assistance covering their maintenance costs only if they are settled in the host Member State, while precluding a national of another Member State from obtaining the status of settled person as a student even if that national is lawfully resident and has received a substantial part of his secondary education in the host Member State and has consequently established a genuine link with the society of that State.

 - Job-seekers allowance: 

Case C-138/02, Collins [2004] ECR I-2703

 69. It may be regarded as legitimate for a Member State to grant such an allowance only after it has been possible to establish that a genuine link exists between the person seeking work and the employment market of that State.

70. The existence of such a link may be determined, in particular, by establishing that the person concerned has, for a reasonable period, in fact genuinely sought work in the Member State in question.

72. However, while a residence requirement is, in principle, appropriate for the purpose of ensuring such a connection, if it is to be proportionate it cannot go beyond what is necessary in order to attain that objective. More specifically, its application by the national authorities must rest on clear criteria known in advance and provision must be made for the possibility of a means of redress of a judicial nature. In any event, if compliance with the requirement demands a period of residence, the period must not exceed what is necessary in order for the national authorities to be able to satisfy themselves that the person concerned is genuinely seeking work in the employment market of the host Member State.”

Case C-258/04, Ioannidis [2005] ECR I-8275

 31. However, a single condition concerning the place where the diploma of completion of secondary education was obtained is too general and exclusive in nature. It unduly favours an element which is not necessarily representative of the real and effective degree of connection between the applicant for the tideover allowance and the geographic employment market, to the exclusion of all other representative elements. It therefore goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objective pursued.

32. Moreover, it is apparent from [Belgian legislation] that a job-seeker who has not completed his secondary education in Belgium nevertheless has a right to a tideover allowance if he has pursued education or training of the same level and equivalent thereto in another Member State and if he is the dependent child of migrant workers for the purposes of Article [45 TFEU] who are residing in Belgium.

33. … However, it is not inconceivable that a person, like Mr Ioannidis, who, after completing secondary education in a Member State, pursues higher education in another Member State and obtains a diploma there, may be in a position to establish a real link with the employment market of that State, even if he is not the dependent child of migrant workers residing in that State. Therefore, such a condition also goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objective pursued.”

Joined Cases C‑22/08 and C‑23/08 Vatsouras et al [2009] ECR I-4585:

34. Article 24(2) of Directive 2004/38 establishes a derogation from the principle of equal treatment enjoyed by Union citizens other than workers, self-employed persons, persons who retain such status and members of their families, who reside within the territory of the host Member State.

35. Under that provision, the host Member State is not obliged to confer entitlement to social assistance on, among others, job-seekers for the longer period during which they have the right to reside there.

36. Nationals of a Member State seeking employment in another Member State fall within the scope of Article [45 TFEU] and therefore enjoy the right to equal treatment laid down in paragraph 2 of that provision (Case C‑258/04 Ioannidis [2005] ECR I‑8275, paragraph 21).

37. Furthermore, in view of the establishment of citizenship of the Union and the interpretation of the right to equal treatment enjoyed by citizens of the Union, it is no longer possible to exclude from the scope of Article [45(2) TFEU] a benefit of a financial nature intended to facilitate access to employment in the labour market of a Member State (Case C‑138/02 Collins [2004] ECR I‑2703, paragraph 63, and Ioannidis, paragraph 22).

38. It is, however, legitimate for a Member State to grant such an allowance only after it has been possible to establish a real link between the job-seeker and the labour market of that State (Case C‑224/98 D’Hoop [2002] ECR I‑6191, paragraph 38, and Ioannidis, paragraph 30).

39. The existence of such a link can be determined, in particular, by establishing that the person concerned has, for a reasonable period, in fact genuinely sought work in the Member State in question (Collins, paragraph 70).

40. It follows that nationals of the Member States seeking employment in another Member State who have established real links with the labour market of that State can rely on Article [45(2) TFEU] in order to receive a benefit of a financial nature intended to facilitate access to the labour market.

41. It is for the competent national authorities and, where appropriate, the national courts not only to establish the existence of a real link with the labour market, but also to assess the constituent elements of that benefit, in particular its purposes and the conditions subject to which it is granted.

42. As the Advocate General has noted in point 57 of his Opinion, the objective of the benefit must be analysed according to its results and not according to its formal structure.

43. A condition such as that in Paragraph 7(1) of the SGB II, under which the person concerned must be capable of earning a living, could constitute an indication that the benefit is intended to facilitate access to employment.

44. In any event, the derogation provided for in Article 24(2) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted in accordance with Article [45(2) TFEU].

45. Benefits of a financial nature which, independently of their status under national law, are intended to facilitate access to the labour market cannot be regarded as constituting ‘social assistance’ within the meaning of Article 24(2) of Directive 2004/38.

- The recent twist: 

Case C-333/13 Dano, ECLI:EU:C:2014:2358: 

63.  It must be stated first of all that ‘special non-contributory cash benefits’ as referred to in Article 70(2) of Regulation No 883/2004 do fall within the concept of ‘social assistance’ within the meaning of Article 24(2) of Directive 2004/38. That concept refers to all assistance schemes established by the public authorities, whether at national, regional or local level, to which recourse may be had by an individual who does not have resources sufficient to meet his own basic needs and the needs of his family and who by reason of that fact may, during his period of residence, become a burden on the public finances of the host Member State which could have consequences for the overall level of assistance which may be granted by that State (judgment in Brey, EU:C:2013:565, paragraph 61).

69. …, so far as concerns access to social benefits, such as those at issue in the main proceedings, a Union citizen can claim equal treatment with nationals of the host Member State only if his residence in the territory of the host Member State complies with the conditions of Directive 2004/38.

……………………..

73. In order to determine whether economically inactive Union citizens, in the situation of the applicants in the main proceedings, whose period of residence in the host Member State has been longer than three months but shorter than five years, can claim equal treatment with nationals of that Member State so far as concerns entitlement to social benefits, it must therefore be examined whether the residence of those citizens complies with the conditions in Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38. Those conditions include the requirement that the economically inactive Union citizen must have sufficient resources for himself and his family members.

74. To accept that persons who do not have a right of residence under Directive 2004/38 may claim entitlement to social benefits under the same conditions as those applicable to nationals of the host Member State would run counter to an objective of the directive, set out in recital 10 in its preamble, namely preventing Union citizens who are nationals of other Member States from becoming an unreasonable burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State.

75. It should be added that, as regards the condition requiring possession of sufficient resources, Directive 2004/38 distinguishes between (i) persons who are working and (ii) those who are not. Under Article 7(1)(a) of Directive 2004/38, the first group of Union citizens in the host Member State have the right of residence without having to fulfil any other condition. On the other hand, persons who are economically inactive are required by Article 7(1)(b) of the directive to meet the condition that they have sufficient resources of their own.

76      Therefore, Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38 seeks to prevent economically inactive Union citizens from using the host Member State’s welfare system to fund their means of subsistence.

…………………….

78. A Member State must therefore have the possibility, pursuant to Article 7 of Directive 2004/38, of refusing to grant social benefits to economically inactive Union citizens who exercise their right to freedom of movement solely in order to obtain another Member State’s social assistance although they do not have sufficient resources to claim a right of residence.

79. To deny the Member State concerned that possibility would, as the Advocate General has stated in point 106 of his Opinion, thus have the consequence that persons who, upon arriving in the territory of another Member State, do not have sufficient resources to provide for themselves would have them automatically, through the grant of a special non-contributory cash benefit which is intended to cover the beneficiary’s subsistence costs.

80. Therefore, the financial situation of each person concerned should be examined specifically, without taking account of the social benefits claimed, in order to determine whether he meets the condition of having sufficient resources to qualify for a right of residence under Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38.

Case C-67/14 Alimanovic ECLI:EU:C:2015:597:

61. By enabling those concerned to know, without any ambiguity, what their rights and obligations are, the criterion referred to both in Paragraph 7(1) of Book II, read in conjunction with Paragraph 2(3) of the Law on freedom of movement, and in Article 7(3)(c) of Directive 2004/38, namely a period of six months after the cessation of employment during which the right to social assistance is retained, is consequently such as to guarantee a significant level of legal certainty and transparency in the context of the award of social assistance by way of basic provision, while complying with the principle of proportionality.

***	What if there has been no movement?

Case C-34/09, Gerardo Ruiz Zambrano v Office national de l’emploi [2011] ECR I-1177:

42. Article 20 TFEU precludes national measures which have the effect of depriving citizens of the Union of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union.

43. A refusal to grant a right of residence to a third country national with dependent minor children in the Member State where those children are nationals and reside, and also a refusal to grant such a person a work permit, has such an effect.

Case C-434/09, Shirley McCarthy v Secretary of State for the Home Department (“McCarthy”) [2011] ECR I-3375:

42. … since a Union citizen such as Mrs McCarthy is not covered by the concept of ‘beneficiary’ for the purposes of Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38, her spouse is not covered by that concept either, given that the rights conferred by that Directive on the family members of a beneficiary of that Directive are not autonomous rights of those family members, but derived rights, acquired through their status as members of the beneficiary’s family ….

43. It follows that Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38 is to be interpreted as meaning that that Directive is not applicable to a Union citizen who has never exercised his right of free movement, who has always resided in a Member State of which he is a national and who is also a national of another Member State.

50. … [B] contrast with the case of Ruiz Zambrano , the national measure … in the present case does not have the effect of obliging Mrs McCarthy to leave the territory of the European Union. Indeed, …, Mrs McCarthy enjoys, under a principle of international law, an unconditional right of residence in the United Kingdom since she is a national of the United Kingdom.

54. … the fact that Mrs McCarthy, in addition to being a national of the United Kingdom, is also a national of Ireland does not mean that a Member State has applied measures that have the effect of depriving her of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of her status as a Union citizen or of impeding the exercise of her right of free movement and residence within the territory of the Member States. Accordingly, in such a context, such a factor is not sufficient, in itself, for a finding that the situation of the person concerned is covered by Article 21 TFEU.


Reading list 

Chalmers, Davies and Monti, Ch, 11.
Wyatt and Dashwood’s European Union Law, Ch. 15.
Barnard, Ch. 12.
Barnard, ‘Free Movement of natural persons’ in Barnard and Peers (eds), European Union
Law (OUP, 2014), Ch. 13 (this also deals with free movement of goods, covered in	the previous lecture). 
Dougan, “The Constitutional Dimension to the Case Law on Union Citizenship”, (2006) 31
 ELRev 613;
Dougan, “Cross-border Educational Mobility and the Exportation of Student Financial
	Assistance”, (2008) 33 ELRev 723; 
Nic Shuibhne, “The Resilience of EU Market Citizenship” (2010) 47 CMLRev 1597
Spaventa, ‘Seeing the Wood Depsite the Trees? On the Scope of Union Citizenship and its 
	Constitutional Effects’, (2008) 45 CMLRev 13
Verschueren, ‘Preventing “benefit tourism” in the EU: A narrow or broad interpretation of the
possibilities offered by the ECJ in Dano?’, (2015) 52 CMLRev 363.
Kochenov and Plender, ‘EU Citizenship: From an Incipient Form to an Incipient Substance? 
	The Discovery of the Treaty Text’, (2012) 37 ELRev 369. 
Thym, ‘The elusive limits of solidarity: Residence rights of and social benefits for economically 
	inactive Union citizens’, (2015) 52 CMLRev 17.



















Lecture 9 	Guest Lecture 

Professor Gareth Davies (Professor of EU Law at Free University of Amsterdam) will deliver a guest lecture. The topic will be announced nearer the time.  

Professor Davies was a barrister in London before becoming a University Lecturer at the University of Groningen (2000-2007) and then moving to the Free University of Amsterdam (2007 to the present). In 2006 he was an Emile Noel Fellow at New York University Law School. He also teaches at Amsterdam University College.
His research concerns primarily the division of powers between the EU and Member States, particularly in the context of economic integration. He has written on the internal market, subsidiarity, the preliminary reference procedure, and the balancing of interests in economic law. 

He is a co-author of Chalmers, Davies and Monti, EU law – Text, Cases and Materials (CUP, 3rd ed. 2014) and the author of numerous scholarly articles. 







Lecture 10 	Revision  

The aim of this lecture is threefold. First, to identify the threads which bring together the different aspects of EU law we have examined so far, and to point out the ways in which EU law has an impact on our every day life and it is inextricably linked to national law. 

Secondly, I shall provide information about the examination and guidance about how to approach both problem and essay questions. In doing so, I shall refer to past examination papers. 

Thirdly, I shall invite you in advance to identify topics and issues which you find complex and shall try to clarify them in class. 





