


NAME (wl) Dorset Yacht Co Ltd v Home Office
CITATION Dorset Yacht Co Ltd v Home Office [1970] AC 1004
CIT [1970] AC 1004
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Borstals; Dangerous Escape; Duty of Care; Vandalism
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Duty of Care; damage caused by persons escaping from Borstal
SUMMARY Borstal officers owe a duty to take such care as is reasonable in all the circumstances with a view to preventing the boys under their control from causing damage to private property. Seven Borstal boys caused damage to the plaintiffs' yacht for which an action was brought against the Home Office. On the preliminary issue whether the Home Office owed any duty of care, Thesiger, J. held in the affirmative and the Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal from his decision.
HELD (1) that the question of law had been rightly answered in the affirmative; and (2) that public policy did not require an immunity from such an action. (Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] A.C. 562 applied; Bourhill v Young [1943] A.C. 92 considered, Carmarthenshire CC v Lewis [1955] C.L.Y. 1904 considered, Commissioner for Railways v Quinlan [1964] A.C. 1054 considered, Davis Contractors v Fareham Urban DC [1956] A.C. 696 considered, Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd [1964] A.C. 465 considered, Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388 considered and Rylands v Fletcher (1868) L.R. 3 H.L. 330 considered).
JUDGE Lord Reid; Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest; Lord Pearson; Lord Diplock; Viscount Dilhorne





NAME (wl) Anns v Merton London Borough Council
CITATION Anns v Merton London Borough Council [1978] AC 728
CIT [1978] AC 728
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Local Government; Building Inspectors; Duty of Care; Local Authorities' Powers and Duties
FLAGS Overruled
SUMMARY Duty of care; local authority
SUMMARY A local authority may be liable in negligence for its failure to inspect building foundations properly or at all if it be shown that the action taken was carried out otherwise than in the bona fide exercise of its discretion and negligently. In 1962 the appellant local council approved building plans for a block of flats, the construction of which was completed that year. In 1970 structural movements led to walls cracking and other damage; in 1972 the lessees commenced proceedings against, inter alia, the council, alleging negligence in failing to inspect the building walls properly or at all so as to ensure that the foundations were built to the appropriate depth as shown on the approved plans. Upon hearing the council's appeal concerning whether the actions were statute-barred, the House of Lords agreed further to consider whether the council were under a duty of care.
HELD that (1) under the Public Health Act 1936 the council had a power, as opposed to a duty, to inspect building work to ensure compliance with the by-laws; (2) failure to carry out inspections would not render the council liable unless it be proved both that they had failed to properly exercise their discretion not to make inspection and that they failed to exercise reasonable care to ensure compliance with the by-laws; (3) where such inspections were carried out the council retained a discretion as to the manner in which such inspections were performed: if such discretion was not bona fide exercised, the council might be liable in negligence for failure to take reasonable care; (4) the actions were not statute-barred, the cause of actions having arisen when the dangerous state of the building manifested itself. ( Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd [1970] A.C. 1004 and Sparham-Souter v Town & Country Developments (Essex) Ltd [1976] Q.B. 858 applied; East Suffolk Rivers Catchment Board v Kent [1941] A.C. 74 considered; Dutton v Bognor Regis Building Co Ltd [1972] 1 Q.B. 373 explained).
JUDGE Lord Wilberforce; Lord Diplock; Lord Salmon; Lord Russell of Killowen





NAME (wl) Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman
CITATION Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 AC 605
CIT [1990] 2 AC 605
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Auditors; Duty of Care; Economic Loss; Professional Negligence; Shareholders
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Professional negligence; Auditors' report to shareholders; No duty of care owed to shareholders or investors
SUMMARY TR, a firm of accountants, appealed against a decision of the Court of Appeal (Times, August 5, 1988) that they owed a duty of care to shareholders when preparing an auditor's report as required by statute. C had brought an action against D and another, directors of F, a public company in respect of which the report had been prepared, alleging negligent misstatement. C had purchased shares in F as part of a take over bid and, placing reliance on TR's report, had bought further shares. The report was subsequently proved to have to given a false picture of F's profits and C suffered a loss. The Court of Appeal had drawn a distinction between existing shareholders, to whom TR owed a duty and potential investors in respect of whom no duty was owed. TR submitted that it did not owe a duty to either group, since the necessary degree of proximity between the parties was missing.
HELD allowing the appeal, that no duty was owed either to existing shareholders, or to potential investors, since for a duty to arise, three factors had to exist, namely: (1) a sufficient degree of proximity in the relationship between the parties; (2) the knowledge that the report would be communicated to the shareholder or investor in connection with a particular transaction in the contemplation of the parties, Smith v Eric S Bush (A Firm) [1990] 1 A.C. 831 applied, and (3) the shareholder or investor would place reliance on the report when deciding whether to enter into the relevant transaction. Auditors of a public company routinely preparing accounts, in contrast to the preparation of a report for a specific purpose for an identified party, owed no duty to the public at large who might place reliance on company accounts when making investment decisions. To impose such a liability would open the floodgates to an indeterminately wide class of people, JEB Fasteners Ltd v Marks Bloom & Co [1981] 3 All E.R. 289 distinguished. Furthermore, it was necessary to impose some limit on liability for economic loss arising in the absence of a contractual relationship between the parties.
JUDGE Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle; Lord Oliver of Aylmerton; Lord Roskill; Lord Ackner; Lord Bridge of Harwich
COUNSEL For C: Christopher Bathurst Q.C., Michael Brindle and Craig Orr. For TR: Peter Goldsmith Q.C. and Stephen Moriarty.





NAME (wl) Attorney General of the British Virgin Islands v Hartwell
CITATION Attorney General of the British Virgin Islands v Hartwell [2004] UKPC 12
CIT [2004] UKPC 12
COURT UKPC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Police; Assault; Duty of Care; Firearms; Police Authorities; Police Officers; Vicarious Liability; Wilful Misconduct
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY When entrusting an officer with a gun, police authorities owed the public a duty to take reasonable care to see that the officer was a suitable person to be entrusted with a dangerous weapon; no distinction was to be drawn between personal injuries inflicted in the course of police duties and personal injuries inflicted by an officer using a police gun for his own ends.
SUMMARY The Attorney General of the British Virgin Islands, BVI, appealed against a decision that the BVI Government was liable in damages to a British tourist, H, who had been shot and wounded by a policeman, L. L had abandoned his post and had travelled to another island where his former partner worked in a bar as a waitress. At the bar L opened fire with a police service revolver and H was seriously injured. L pleaded guilty to charges of unlawful and malicious wounding and having a firearm with intent to do grievous bodily harm. H brought civil proceedings against L and the Attorney General as the representative of the BVI Government. The Attorney General submitted that the Government owed no duty of care to H in respect of the persons to whom the police entrusted firearms as there was no sufficiently proximate relationship between the police authorities and H.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that (1) the Government was not vicariously liable for L's actions. L was "on a frolic of his own" having deliberately and consciously abandoned his post and his duties. L's wrongful use of the gun was not so closely connected with acts he was authorised to do that, for the purposes of the liability of the Government as his employer, his wrongful use could be regarded as made by him in the ordinary course of his employment; (2) the police authorities had been negligent in permitting L to have access to a revolver. The police authorities knew or ought to have known that L was not a fit and proper person to be entrusted with a gun because, until his domestic problems were resolved, he was volatile and unstable. L's deliberate, wrongful conduct did not constitute an intervening event so as to relieve the Government of liability. The case was not one of omission because the alleged duty of care related to entrusting L with access to the gun. The standard of diligence expected of a reasonable person when entrusting another with a gun was high. The police plainly owed a duty to the public at large to take reasonable care to see that police officers to whom they entrusted weapons were suitable. The wide reach of the duty was proportionate to the gravity of the risks. It was reasonably foreseeable that someone like L might take and use the weapon for his own purposes. The police owed a duty of care to H in respect of damage arising in the way it did. Given L's previous history the police authorities had failed to exercise the degree of care the situation demanded and were in breach of their duty to H.
JUDGE Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe; Baroness Hale of Richmond; Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood
COUNSEL For the appellant: James Guthrie QC. For the respondent: James Dingemans QC, Sarah Crowther.





NAME (wl) Osman v Ferguson
CITATION Osman v Ferguson [1993] 4 All ER 344
CIT [1993] 4 All ER 344
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Crime Prevention; Negligence; Police Officers; Public Policy
FLAGS Approved
HELD Public policy would not allow a negligence action to be brought against the police for failing to stop a teacher killing a pupil's father and injuring the pupil.
JUDGE McCowan LJ; Beldam LJ; Simon Brown LJ
COUNSEL For the police: Simon Freeland. For O: John Hendy Q.C. and Tim Kerr.





NAME (wl) Everett v Comojo Ltd UK
CITATION Everett v Comojo Ltd UK [2011] EWCA Civ 13
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 13
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Hospitality and Leisure; Personal Injury; Breach of Duty of Care; Duty of Care; Foreseeability; Knives; Nightclubs; Occupiers' Liability; Personal Injury; Proximity; Wounding with Intent
ABSTRACT The appellants (E) appealed against a decision dismissing their claims for damages for personal injury arising from an incident at a nightclub owned and managed by the respondent company (C) when they were injured in a knife attack perpetrated by another guest (G).
ABSTRACT The nightclub was part of a hotel. Use of the nightclub was restricted to members and their guests and hotel residents. E were guests at the nightclub. It was said that one of the group they were with touched a waitress (K) on the bottom. She did not complain but the incident was witnessed by a member (B) who was aggrieved on her behalf. He told her, more than once, that those responsible would apologise to her before the end of the evening. B was later joined at the nightclub by G. K was concerned that there might be a confrontation and went to speak to the manager. At that time E decided to leave the nightclub. B asked for an apology which was not forthcoming. G then attacked E and stabbed them with a knife. The judge held that C could owe a duty to protect its guests from the actions of a third party, on the basis that there might be such a degree of proximity between the parties that a legal duty would arise. However, he held that no duty of care arose in the circumstances because, at the time when K left the bar to speak to the manager, there was not a sufficiently great risk of injury; she was not under a duty to do anything about G at that stage. If she had done nothing, she could not have been criticised. All she had was a suspicion that that there might be some sort of confrontation. But it was not known that G had a weapon and there had been no history of B or his associates being violent.
ABSTRACT E submitted that in the circumstances the judge should have concluded that there was a duty of care and that there had been a breach. C contended that there should be no duty on the managers of a bar to protect guests from violence by other guests and, if there was any duty at all, it should be drawn very restrictively.
SUMMARY There was a duty of care on the management of a nightclub in respect of the actions of third parties on the premises but the standard of care imposed or the scope of the duty had to be fair, just and reasonable. As between the managers of a nightclub and guests, there should not be a higher degree of foreseeability than was required under the common duty of care in the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The test for the existence of a duty of care was the threefold test of proximity, foreseeability and whether it was fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty, Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 and Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire [2008] UKHL 50, [2009] 1 A.C. 225 followed (see para. 24 of judgment). (2) The relationship between the management of a nightclub and its guests was of sufficient proximity to justify the existence of a duty of care. It was foreseeable that there was some risk that one guest might assault another; that was recognised by C's own risk assessment. It was fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care on the management of a nightclub in respect of injuries caused by a third party, provided that the scope of the duty was appropriately set (paras 31-33). (3) Thus there was a duty on the management of a nightclub in respect of the actions of third parties on the premises but the standard of care imposed or the scope of the duty had also to be fair, just and reasonable. As between the managers of a nightclub and guests, there should not be a higher degree of foreseeability than was required under the common duty of care in the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957, Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd [1970] A.C. 1004 considered. The degree of proximity, including the economic relationship, between the two was so close that no special rule of foreseeability was required in the interests of fairness, justice and reasonableness. The judge did not misdirect himself when he adopted the Australian case of Chordas v Bryant (Wellington) (1988) 91 A.L.R. 149 as the basis of the duty, Chordas considered (paras 34, 35). (4) In all the circumstances, K had not been in breach of duty. She had realised that there was a possibility of a confrontation between G and one or more of the members of E's group. But there was no reason to think that a confrontation was imminent. The incident to which B had taken exception had occurred a considerable time earlier. B had no previous history of causing trouble, either himself or through his associates. K could not have been criticised even if she had done nothing. As it was, she went to speak to her manager. That was a reasonable thing for her to do. There was no apparent urgency; it was not as if a confrontation had begun and the risk of violence was imminent (para.37).
JUDGE Rix LJ; Smith LJ; Richards LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Simon Butler, Johnathan Payne. For the respondent: Lord Faulks QC, Quintin Tudor-Evans.





NAME (wl) Kent v Griffiths
CITATION Kent v Griffiths [2001] QB 36
CIT [2001] QB 36
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Ambulance Service; Delay; Duty of Care; Foreseeability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY duty of care; ambulance service; duty owed to individual members of public; analogous to service provided by hospitals; reasonable response to emergency call required
SUMMARY K, pregnant and asthmatic, was attended by her GP, who at 4.27 pm dialled 999 and requested an ambulance to take K to hospital, giving her personal details and informing them that she suffered from bronchial asthma. The ambulance took 38 minutes to arrive, although a crew member had falsely recorded the arrival time. K suffered a respiratory arrest with catastrophic results, including substantial memory impairment, personality change and a miscarriage. K brought an action, inter alia, against the London Ambulance Service, LAS, alleging negligence in failing to respond promptly and in failing to give her oxygen continuously in the ambulance. LAS was found liable in damages, since in the particular circumstances they owed a duty of care to K as an individual patient. The judge held that there was no reasonable excuse for the delay and, because it was a highly probable that K would not have suffered a respiratory arrest but for the delay, LAS was culpable. LAS appealed contending that its situation was analogous to that of the police and fire brigade, who owed no common law duty of care to the public at large.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that an ambulance service could owe a duty of care to an individual member of the public, once an emergency phone call providing the personal details of that person had been accepted by the service and LAS was liable in damages to K. The situation with LAS could be distinguished from that of the police force and fire service, since they served to protect the general public, whereas the service provided by LAS, as part of the health service, was more akin to that which was provided by hospitals to individual patients, Alexandrou v Oxford [1993] 4 All E.R. 328 and Capital and Counties Plc v Hampshire CC [1997] Q.B. 1004 distinguished. In the instant case, only K's welfare was at issue and there was no conflict of priorities, therefore the requirement of foreseeability necessary to establish sufficient proximity was made out.
JUDGE Lord Woolf MR; Aldous LJ; Laws LJ
COUNSEL For K: Elizabeth-Anne Gumbel Q.C. For LAS: James Munby Q.C. and Mary O'Rourke.





NAME (wl) Vowles v Evans & the Welsh RFU
CITATION Vowles v Evans & the Welsh RFU [2003] EWCA Civ 31
CIT [2003] EWCA Civ 31
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Immigration; Asylum Seekers; Germany; Parents; Removal; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life; Sri Lanka
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Removal of the appellant to Sri Lanka did not amount to an interference with his family life with relatives in Germany; something more than normal emotional ties was required to invoke the protection of the Human Rights Act Sch.1 Part I Art.8 and it would only be in exceptional circumstances that a family life could be established with relatives outside of the UK.
SUMMARY K, a Sri Lankan asylum seeker, appealed against a decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal to overset an adjudicator's decision not to remove him from the United Kingdom as to do so would have disproportionately interfered with his right to respect for family life under the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch. 1 Part I Art.8. K was a single 38 year old man, with no remaining family members in Sri Lanka and no established family in the United Kingdom. Members of K's immediate family had been granted asylum in Germany with whom he had enjoyed "family life" by telephone contact or visits from his sister.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that the removal of K to Sri Lanka was not an interference with his family life with relatives in Germany. Although it was not essential that members of the family should be in the same country, it would only be in exceptional circumstances that a family life could be established with relatives outside the United Kingdom. There was no presumption to family life and something more than normal emotional ties, such as dependency, were required to establish a family life under Art.8.
JUDGE Simon Brown LJ; Sedley LJ; Arden LJ
COUNSEL For K: Manjit S Gill Q.C. and Myles Jackson. For the Secretary of State: Robin Tam.





NAME (wl) Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire
CITATION Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] AC 53
CIT [1989] AC 53
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Duty of Care; Negligence; Police Powers and Duties
FLAGS Criticised
SUMMARY Duty of care; police; duty to suppress crime; whether liable for failure to apprehend criminal
SUMMARY Police officers do not owe a general duty of care to the public at large to apprehend unknown criminals, nor to individual members of the public unless such failure creates an exceptional additional risk and there is a proximity between the officers and the potential victim. H was the mother of the last of the victims of Peter Sutcliffe, who murdered some 13 young women in Yorkshire between 1975 and 1980. She contended that but for negligence by the West Yorkshire police, he would have been apprehended before her daughter had been murdered. H's claim was struck out.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that there is no general duty of care owed by the police to members of the public at large to apprehend an unknown criminal. In any event, as a matter of public policy, the police were immune from allegations of negligence arising from their investigation and suppression of crime.
JUDGE Lord Keith of Kinkel; Lord Brandon of Oakbrook; Lord Templeman; Lord Oliver; Lord Goff of Chieveley





NAME (wl) Selwood v Durham CC
CITATION Selwood v Durham CC [2012] EWCA Civ 979
CIT [2012] EWCA Civ 979
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Local Government; Health; Assumption of Responsibility; Duty of Care; Duty to Warn; Local Authorities; Mental Patients; Nhs Trusts; Personal Injury; Public Sector Employees; Right to Life; Social Workers; Third Parties
ABSTRACT The appellant (S) appealed against a decision ([2011] Med. L.R. 213) striking out her claim for personal injury against the second and third respondents.
ABSTRACT S worked as a social worker for the local authority (R1), which worked closely with closely with two NHS trusts (R2 and R3) to provide integrated social care and mental health services. The respondents had signed a protocol document setting out the working arrangements between them. One of S's cases concerned a young girl. The girl's father (X) suffered from mental health problems and was a voluntary patient of R2 and R3. He was known to have a history of violent behaviour. He told medical professionals that he wished to harm the social worker involved in his daughter's case. He later told medical staff he would "kill her on the spot" if he saw her. That threat was not passed to S or to R1. X left hospital and attacked S with a knife, causing grave injuries. He later pleaded guilty to attempted murder. S's claim against R2 and R3 was struck out on the basis that they did not owe her a duty of care in respect of the action of a third party.
SUMMARY It was arguable that an NHS trust working closely with a local authority to provide integrated services could owe a duty of care to an employee of the local authority in respect of the action of a third party.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The case of Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 had set out a tripartite test for the imposition of a duty of care toward a claimant for the actions of a third party. The test was that of foreseeability, proximity and fairness, justice and reasonableness, Caparo followed. It was not necessary for a claimant to show that the defendant had assumed any responsibility for some aspect of his or her safety. If the judge thought that assumption of responsibility was a pre-requisite for the existence of a duty of care that would have been an error of law. It was just one aspect of the wider issue of whether it was fair, just and reasonable to impose the duty of care. However, the judge had not fallen into that error (see paras 50-51 of judgment). (2) The judge appeared to have thought that before an assumption of responsibility could arise, something positive to that effect had to have been said or done which clearly indicated such assumption. However, it was possible to infer an assumption of responsibility from circumstances, Mitchell v Glasgow City Council [2009] UKHL 11, [2009] 1 A.C. 874 followed and Silva's Fishing Corp v Maweza 1957 (2) S.A. 256 considered. The judge had failed to consider whether an assumption of responsibility could be inferred from the protocol or working arrangements between the respondents. The judge had therefore erred in that respect (para.52). (3) Factors relating to foreseeability of harm and proximity of the relationship often also impinged on the question of fairness, justice and reasonableness. Where the defendant was a public authority, there would be important additional factors of public policy to be considered, Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire [2008] UKHL 50, [2009] 1 A.C. 225 considered. Nevertheless, there might be some classes of claimant who stood in such a special relationship with the defendant public authority that it would be fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care. A defendant would owe the employer's duty of care to its employees despite there being a potential conflict of interest between that duty and the defendant's duties to the recipients of its core services. If a duty was owed to a limited class of employees for the action of a third party, the force of some of the policy considerations was less than if the duty was said to be owed to the world at large. The judge had failed to consider S's special position. Taking the particular relationship between the parties into account, it would be open to a trial judge to conclude that it was fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care on R2 and R3 (paras 53-56). (4) It was also arguable that the respondents might have breached S's rights under the European Convention on Human Rights art.2. The case was remitted for trial on both issues (paras 57-58).
JUDGE Thorpe LJ; Rimer LJ; Dame Janet Smith
COUNSEL For the appellant: Michael Kent QC, Mark Armitage. For the respondents: Angus Moon QC, James Berry.





NAME (wl) Osman v United Kingdom
CITATION Osman v United Kingdom [2004] EWCA Civ 1731
CIT [2004] EWCA Civ 1731
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Immigration Other Related Subjects: Administrative Law; Adversarial Proceedings; Appeals; Asylum Seekers; Discrimination; Immigration Appeals Tribunal; Judicial Review; Statutory Reviews
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY The regime under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 s.101, which provided for a statutory review of a decision by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, provided adequate and proportionate protection of the rights of asylum seekers. Therefore the court had a discretion to decline to hear an application for judicial review of issues that had been, or could have been, the subject of statutory review.
SUMMARY The appellant asylum seekers (M and G), who had come from Zimbabwe and Iran respectively, appealed against a decision ([2004] EWHC 588, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 2953) that it was an abuse of process for an asylum seeker to apply for judicial review of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal's refusal to allow an application under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 s.101(1) . M and G, in separate cases, had had their applications to appeal under s.101(2) refused. M submitted that it was unjust that asylum seekers be restricted to s.101(2), which involved no right to an oral hearing and carried no right, in the event of refusal, of appeal to the Court of Appeal. G submitted that immigration decisions fell within the ambit of the procedural obligations inherent in the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.2 , Art.3, Art.5, Art.6 and Art.8 and the refusal to grant permission to judicially review decisions of the IAT constituted discrimination against foreign nationals contrary to Art.14.
HELD dismissing the appeals, that (1) the statutory regime, including statutory review under s.101(2) of a refusal of permission to appeal, provided adequate and proportionate protection of an asylum seeker's rights. The power of judges to review the legality of administrative decisions was a cornerstone of the rule of law. However, the court had a discretion to decline to hear an application for judicial review of issues that had been, or could have been, the subject of statutory review. The court had been correct to consider whether an alternative remedy was proportionate when deciding whether to exercise its power of judicial review. Parliament's wish to process asylum applications expeditiously was a legitimate objective of s.101. Section 101 provided for scrutiny of individual cases on paper. That scrutiny was adequate because judges of the Administrative Court were experienced and understood the importance of the decisions they were making. They were unlikely to overlook an error of law, R. (on the application of Sivasubramaniam) v Wandsworth County Court [2002] EWCA Civ 1738, [2003] 1 W.L.R. 475 and Sengupta v Holmes [2002] EWCA Civ 1104, Times, August 19, 2002 considered. (2) Although it was possible to raise an argument under Art.14 there were two reasons why any potential breach could be justified objectively. Firstly, as Art.5(1)(f) recognised, non nationals seeking entry or asylum stood in a fundamentally different situation from those who could enter or remain by right. The courts would ensure due process for them so far as possible, but due process did not necessarily mean the same process for all. Secondly, whilst different from other available forms of recourse to the courts, s.101 was not deficient or unjust to an extent requiring alternative recourse by way of judicial review.
JUDGE Lord Phillips MR; Sedley LJ; Scott Baker LJ
COUNSEL For M: Michael Fordham. For G: Raza Husain. For the secretary of state: Elisabeth Laing.





NAME (wl) Z and others v United Kingdom
CITATION Z and others v United Kingdom [2015] CSOH 178
CIT [2015] CSOH 178
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure; Contaminated Land; Pleadings; Remoteness; Scotland
ABSTRACT Residents (M) of a street, which was formerly an industrial site, raised an action against developers (C) and environmental consultants (S) alleging that the site was contaminated with harmful chemicals which they had inhaled to their detriment.
ABSTRACT M pled common law fault against C and S, as well as breach of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 s.33(1)(a), in respect of which they sought damages in terms of s.73(6). M further claimed that their registered social landlord (L) had breached an implied term of their tenancy agreement that a house be provided in a tenantable and habitable condition, and were thereafter in breach of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 that a house be provided which was fit for human habitation.
ABSTRACT At procedure roll, each of the defenders raised pleas to the relevancy and argued that the action was time barred in terms of the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act 1973 s.17. M averred inter alia that C were responsible for constructing the part of the site where M's homes were located and that C knew of the risks to human health from contamination of land through the former uses thereof; that while remediation works carried out by S in 1993 and 1994 were neither commissioned nor instructed by C, they were nevertheless provided with copies of reports from which C should have known no testing had been done for solvents; C had failed to instruct further investigation of contamination for polyaromatic hydrocarbons or carcinogenic material in response to investigations done at part of the site in 2000 and 2001; and that they had failed to take reasonable care as a result of which the site continued to be contaminated by a variety of volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds. M's case against S was predicated on their being environmental consultants, responsible for the investigation and remediation of the site, and it was averred inter alia that they failed to investigate and advise on the nature, concentration and distribution of contamination of the site by solvents as a reasonably competent environmental consultant would have done.
SUMMARY A common law action by residents of a street, which was formerly an industrial site, against environmental consultants was relevantly pled and would be allowed to proceed where it was fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care on them.
HELD Case put out by order.
HELD (1) M's common law case directed against C was irrelevant: C's duty of reasonable care was sufficiently discharged by considering the terms of S's reports and given that C was not averred to have had any specialised knowledge of environmental matters, there was no proper basis for averring that C knew, or ought to have known, from S's reports of 1991, 1992 and 1994 that the investigations had been limited; in order to succeed, M would have had to establish that C owed them a non-delegable duty of care which, after a consideration of the authorities, they could not do, and to the extent that M sought to invoke the hazardous operations exception to the general rule, their attempt was misconceived where developing residential housing did not fall therein and, in the circumstances, C's personal duty of care did not extend to checking S's work. (2) M had pled a relevant common law case against S and were entitled to a proof: the duty cast on S was said to have been to take reasonable care in the performance of their work as environmental consultants for the safety of those whom they knew would occupy the houses to be built on the land, that it was their responsibility to investigate for contamination and to remediate, and in the circumstances of this case, it was not arguable that it would not be fair, just or reasonable to impose such a duty of care on S, Mitchell v Glasgow City Council [2008] CSIH 19, 2008 S.C. 351, distinguished ; it would not be possible until after proof to determine the precise nature and extent of S's duties to M over the entire period of S's involvement in the development but M had averred enough to entitle them to an inquiry. (3) M's case against L fell to be dismissed: in so far as M's case relied on the provisions of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987, it was based on a misconstruction of the implied terms on which they founded, statutory and common law made it clear that a landlord's obligations related to the repair of the fabric of the let property itself, in respect of which M had averred no defect; thereafter in respect of the alleged breach of statutory duty in the context of the 2001 Act, there was no averment that before the commencement of the Scottish secure tenancy or of when M became joint tenants, that L had failed to ensure that the house was reasonably fit for human habitation. (4) M's contention that either C or S were in breach of s.33(1) of the 1990 Act had to be rejected: M had offered to prove, and had relevantly averred, that the ash, slag, volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds, and the ground contaminated thereby, in the part of the site where M's homes were built was controlled waste for the purposes of Pt II of the Act, but M was specific about the dates when such waste was redistributed, namely the first quarters of 1993 and 1994, following the completion of which, S had issued a certificate of substantial completion in respect of which M contended that an act of deposit continued indefinitely but the contention that s.33(1) applied to a continuing state of affairs was misplaced, Thames Waste Management Ltd v Surrey CC [1997] Env. L.R. 148, considered . (5) M's averments of causation were sufficient to entitle them to lead evidence to the effect that they had each suffered injury to their health as a result of the inhalation of solvents which, but for S's fault, would have been discovered and removed before their homes were built. (6) On the time bar issue, M's position was that neither had been aware until sometime after September 2009 that their injuries were attributable in whole, or in part, to an act or omission thus on the face of it, their right of action had expired and if postponement of the commencement of the triennium were to be put in issue, it would be for M to do so by asserting that it would not have been reasonably practicable to have become aware that their injuries were attributable, in whole or in part, to an act or omission so that the defenders would be given an opportunity to assert the contrary; it might be that all M required to add was a formal averment to the effect that it would not have been reasonably practicable for them to have acquired knowledge that the injuries were caused by an act or omission until a date falling after September 2009, and the case would be put out by order to allow M's advisers the opportunity to consider the sufficiency of their pleadings.
JUDGE Lord Jones





NAME (wl) JD v East Berkshire Community Health NHS Trust
CITATION JD v East Berkshire Community Health NHS Trust [2005] UKHL 23
CIT [2005] UKHL 23
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Family Law; Health; Child Abuse; Doctors; Duty of Care; Professional Negligence; Proximity; Social Workers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Health professionals responsible for investigating suspected child abuse did not owe a parent suspected of having committed the abuse a duty sounding in damages if they carried out that investigation in good faith but carelessly.
SUMMARY The appellant parents (P) appealed against the decision ([2003] EWCA Civ 1151, [2004] Q.B. 558) that their claims for damages for psychiatric injury brought against doctors or social workers who had wrongly determined that P had abused or harmed their children had to be dismissed on public policy grounds. P's claims were based on allegations that their children's illness or injuries had been negligently misdiagnosed as having a non accidental origin and that as a result of that misdiagnosis P had suffered a recognised form of psychiatric injury and in some cases financial loss. P submitted that the health care professionals' duty to exercise due skill and care in the investigation of suspected abuse extended to the child's parents as primary carers as well as to the child.
HELD dismissing the appeals (Lord Bingham dissenting), that (1) health professionals responsible for investigating suspected child abuse did not owe the person suspected of having committed the abuse a duty sounding in damages if they carried out that investigation in good faith but carelessly. At common law alleged interference with family life did not justify according a suspected parent a higher level of protection than other suspected perpetrators. That was because there was a conflict between the interests of the parents and the child where the parent was the suspected abuser. Health professionals, acting in good faith in what they believed were the best interests of the child, should not be subject to potentially conflicting duties when deciding whether a child might have been abused, or whether their doubts should be communicated to others, or what further investigatory or protective steps should be taken, Sullivan v Moody 207 C.L.R. 562 considered. The appropriate level of protection for a parent suspected of abusing his child was that clinical and other investigations must be conducted in good faith. That afforded suspected parents a similar level of protection to that afforded generally to persons suspected of committing crimes. (2) The respondents did not owe substantially the same duty of care to P as to the children since P were not in sufficient proximity to give rise to a duty of care. As the Court of Appeal held, there were cogent reasons of public policy for holding that no common law duty of care should be owed to P and that it was accordingly not fair, just and reasonable to impose such a duty, Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 applied.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Steyn; Lord Rodger of Earlsferry; Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood
COUNSEL For the appellants: Brian Langstaff QC, Brian Donovan, David Gripton, Mary Ruck. For the respondents (except Kirklees MBC): Robert Francis QC, Angus Moon. For Kirklees MBC: Edward Faulks QC, Alastair Hammerton, Laura Johnson.





NAME (wl) Lawrence v Pembrokeshire County Council
CITATION Lawrence v Pembrokeshire County Council [2007] EWCA Civ 446
CIT [2007] EWCA Civ 446
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Human Rights; Family Law; Local Government; Child Abuse; Conflict of Interest; Duty of Care; Investigations; Local Authorities; Parents; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (L) appealed against a decision ([2006] EWHC 1029, [2006] 2 F.C.R. 363) striking out her claim in negligence against the respondent local authority (P).
ABSTRACT P had placed L's children on the child protection register for about 14 months. The ombudsman upheld a number of complaints by L of maladministration on P's part and recommended that it should pay her compensation. L then issued proceedings in negligence against P. The judge held that the reasoning of the majority of the law lords in JD v East Berkshire Community Health NHS Trust [2005] UKHL 23, [2005] 2 A.C. 373 that a duty of care was not owed by investigating professionals to parents suspected of child abuse had not been affected by the advent of the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8 to domestic law.
ABSTRACT L argued that the advent of Art.8 to domestic law called for an evolutionary change in the law of negligence where, as in the instant context, it overlapped with a parent's right to respect for his or her family life. L submitted that the court should take a "small incremental step" further than that taken by it and the House of Lords in East Berkshire , so as to give full effect to Art.8 in serving the interest of parents in family life as much as that of the child.
SUMMARY The reasoning of the majority of the law lords in JD v East Berkshire Community Health NHS Trust (2005) UKHL 23, (2005) 2 AC 373 that a duty of care was not owed by investigating professionals to parents suspected of child abuse had not been affected by the advent of the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8 to domestic law.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD L's proposed "small incremental step" in the development of the common law would be a step too far. The public interest in effective and fair investigation and the prevention of criminal behaviour had fashioned the common law to protect those suspected of it from malice or bad faith, but not from a well-intentioned but negligent mistake. The basis for that distinction was the need to provide protection to those who had a duty to enforce the law in good faith from the imposition of a duty in negligence that could or might tend to inhibit them in the effective fulfilment of that duty. The development proposed would fundamentally distort the law of negligence in this area, putting at risk the protection for children which it provided in its present form. Article 8, with its wholly different legal construct of engaging liability without reference to a duty of care, complemented it in facilitating a similar protection through a mechanism for justification. The provision of a discrete Convention remedy through the medium of the Human Rights Act 1998 did not, on that account, necessitate a change of the common law in the manner proposed. The instant court and the House of Lords had recently clarified in East Berkshire the relevant principles of the common law, including the effect or lack of effect in relation to that issue of the impact of the 1998 Act, concluding that they precluded the existence of such a duty to the parent. That reasoning still stood, East Berkshire followed, Brooks v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2005] UKHL 24, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1495, Sullivan v Moody 207 C.L.R. 562 and B v Attorney General of New Zealand [2003] UKPC 61, [2003] 4 All E.R. 833 applied, and TP v United Kingdom (28945/95) [2001] 2 F.L.R. 549 and Venema v Netherlands (35731/97) [2003] 1 F.L.R. 552 considered.
JUDGE Auld LJ; Scott Baker LJ; Richards LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Robert Weir. For the respondent: Alastair Hammerton.





NAME (wl) Swinney v Chief Constable of Northumbria
CITATION Swinney v Chief Constable of Northumbria [2016] EWHC 181 (QB)
CIT [2016] EWHC 181 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Police Other Related Subjects: Torts; Negligence; Causation; Dangerous Offenders; Duty of Care; Fugitive Offenders; Police Forces; Police Officers; Public Policy; Threats; Warnings
ABSTRACT The brother and sister of a police officer (R), seriously wounded by a fugitive offender (M) while on duty, claimed that the defendant police force had breached its duty of care by failing to warn him of threats made by the offender against police officers.
ABSTRACT R had been shot in the head and blinded by M. M had already shot and seriously injured his ex-partner, and had killed her new partner in the mistaken belief that he was a police officer. M had rung 999 to explain his actions, and made threats against police officers in general, saying that he was "coming to get you". The superintendent in charge of the operation decided not to issue an immediate warning to all police officers. She decided to wait for cell-site analysis and for the 999 call to be considered further before issuing any warning. There was a period of about seven-and-a-half minutes between the superintendent being told of M's threat and R being shot. The police denied that a duty of care existed or that it had been negligent not to issue a warning, and did not accept that doing so would have prevented the shooting of R. R began the instant proceedings, which were continued by his brother and sister following his suicide.
ABSTRACT 
SUMMARY The police had not owed a duty of care to an officer, shot and blinded by a fugitive offender who had already killed one person and injured another, to warn him of threats made by the offender against police officers in general.
HELD Claim dismissed.
HELD (1) The first issue was whether the police owed R a relevant duty of care. The applicability of the three-stage test in Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 to negligence claims against the police was affirmed in Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [2014] EWCA Civ 15, [2014] P.I.Q.R. P14. The requirement of foreseeability was satisfied. M had made credible express threats against police officers. The possibility that he might carry them out was not merely foreseeable, but foreseen. The second requirement, proximity, was also satisfied. The real issue was whether the imposition of a duty was fair, just and reasonable. That was closely connected to the principle of public policy that the police were generally under no duty of care in respect of activities inextricably bound up with the investigation and prevention of crime, Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] A.C. 53 followed. In particular, no private law duty was owed to protect individuals against harm caused by criminals. A chief constable owed officers within his force a non-delegable duty to take reasonable care for their safety by ensuring both the provision and operation of a safe system of work, Mullaney v Chief Constable of the West Midlands [2001] EWCA Civ 700, [2001] Po. L.R. 150 applied. That was a different starting point to cases brought by members of the public. The duty as a quasi employer could, however, be excluded as a matter of public policy, or because it would not be fair, just and reasonable for such a duty to exist, Hill followed. That was more likely in cases involving operational decisions taken under pressure. That was a particularly important consideration where there was a risk that imposition of a duty would give rise to "defensive policing", or in circumstances which involved the performance of the "core functions" of the police, Robinson applied. In such cases, the important public policy was likely to outweigh the public interest in the performance of the chief constable's duty as a quasi employer (see paras 84-108 of judgment).
HELD (2) It would not be fair, just or reasonable for a duty of care to be owed in the instant circumstances, Caparo and Robinson applied. That was not to say that the superintendent had made the right decision. Rather, it meant that, even if the decision was negligent, the policy decision was that there should be no private law claim for negligence in order to ensure that the police's ability to perform their public functions in the interests of the community, fearlessly and with despatch, was not impeded. That policy decision bore harshly on R, but that was a consequence the law was prepared to accept in the overall public interest. That did not mean that the police owed no duty at all or that a victim of police misconduct had no remedy. There might, in appropriate circumstances, be a claim under ECHR art.2 or a private law claim for misconduct in public office. However, the only claim advanced in the instant case was in negligence, for which a private law duty of care was an essential element of the cause of action. On the instant facts, no such duty existed (paras 109-115).
HELD (3) That was sufficient to dismiss the claim. However, the superintendent's decision to await the imminent arrival of cell site analysis and to have the 999 call listened to properly before issuing any warning to officers was reasonable, even if other commanders might have taken a different course. The superintendent had to operate, under pressure, in a complex operation, with no time for full reflection. Stripping away sympathy for R and hindsight knowledge of the imminence of M's attack on him, the superintendent had made a decision at which other commanders facing a similar dilemma would also have arrived. Her decision could not be regarded as negligent. The operation was not flawless, but the failings had no bearing on the outcome of the case (paras 117-140).
HELD (4) The claimants had also not proved, on the balance of probabilities, that a warning would have averted the injuries suffered by R (paras 141-148).
JUDGE Males J
COUNSEL For the claimants: Geoffrey Tattersall QC, Darryl Allen QC. For the defendant: John Beggs QC, Aaron Rathmell.





NAME (wl) Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire
CITATION Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire [2008] UKHL 50
CIT [2008] UKHL 50
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Police; Human Rights; Duty of Care; Police Powers and Duties; Right to Life; Threats; Victims
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The first appellant chief constable appealed against a decision ( [2007] EWCA Civ 325, [2007] 1 W.L.R. 1821 ) that the police had been under a duty to take preventive measures to protect a witness who was being threatened and who was subsequently murdered, and that they were in breach of that duty and therefore acted incompatibly with the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.2 . The second appellant chief constable appealed against a decision ( Smith v Chief Constable of Sussex [2008] EWCA Civ 39, [2008] H.R.L.R. 23 ) that a claim in negligence against the police arising from an allegation that they had failed to take necessary steps after being informed of death threats against an individual should not have been struck out.
ABSTRACT The cases involved two victims (G and S). G had been murdered just days before he was due to give evidence for the prosecution at the trial of a defendant (B) on charges of theft. B was convicted of G's murder. G's parents alleged that G's murder by B had occurred after a number of threats and incidents of witness intimidation by B against G and others of which the investigating police officer (R) should have been aware and which should have led him to take steps to protect G against the risk of serious harm. According to S, he had repeatedly informed the police that his former partner (P) had threatened to kill him, the police had ample evidence and information to arrest P and they had no excuse for not doing so. While the police were investigating the matter, P attacked S with a claw-hammer, causing serious injuries. In bringing proceedings against the respective chief constables, G's parents relied on art.2 of the Convention, while S's claim was brought under the common law. The issue was whether the Court of Appeal had been correct to reach the two decisions that it had.
SUMMARY The principle established in Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] A.C. 53 , namely that, in the absence of special circumstances, the police owed no common law duty of care to protect individuals against harm caused by criminals, should be preserved.
HELD Appeals allowed.
HELD (Lord Bingham dissenting in respect of S's case) (1) (Per Lord Hope) As to the art.2 claim brought by G's parents, the relevant test was set out by the Strasbourg court in Osman v United Kingdom (23452/94) [1999] 1 F.L.R. 193 . Under the test, the court had to be satisfied that the authorities knew or ought to have known "at the time" of the existence of "a real and immediate risk to the life" of an identified individual from the criminal acts of a third party. If they failed to take measures within the scope of their powers which, judged reasonably, might have been expected to avoid that risk, the relevant positive obligation would have been violated. In G's case, that test had not been met. The murder had been the action of a seriously disturbed and unpredictable individual, and it could not reasonably be said that R should have anticipated, from the information available to him at the time, that B constituted a risk to G's life that was both real and imminent. It had been argued that by involving G in B's prosecution, in particular by requesting him to be a witness at B's trial, the police had exposed him to a risk to his life, thereby placing him in a special category of witnesses, not shared by all members of the public, to whom a lower threshold applied. However, the test in Osman was invariable and was not intended to impose a standard which might vary from case to case, Osman applied. (2) (Per Lord Hope) As to S's claim in negligence, the balance of advantage in this difficult area lay in preserving the principle set out in Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] A.C. 53 , whereby, in the absence of special circumstances, the police owed no common law duty of care to protect individuals against harm caused by criminals. In Brooks v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2005] UKHL 24, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1495 Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead said that there might be exceptional cases where the circumstances compelled the conclusion that the absence of a remedy sounding in damages would be an affront to the principles that underlay the common law. That approach was to be respected, but S's case did not fall into that category. That was why, if a civil remedy was to be provided, there needed to be a more fundamental departure from the core principle in Hill . That should be resisted, in the interests of the wider community, Hill and Brooks followed. (3) (Per Lord Bingham) The Court of Appeal had been right to decide as it had in S's case. If a member of the public (X) furnished a police officer (Y) with apparently credible evidence that a third party whose identity and whereabouts were known presented a specific and imminent threat to his life or physical safety, Y would owe X a duty to take reasonable steps to assess such threat and, if appropriate, take reasonable steps to prevent it being executed.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers; Lord Carswell; Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood
COUNSEL For the original appellant in the first appeal: Edward Faulks QC, Edward Bishop. For the appellant in the second appeal: Edward Faulks QC, Edward Bishop. For the original respondents in the first appeal: Monica Carss-Frisk QC, Julian Waters, Iain Steele. For the respondent in the second appeal: Heather Williams QC, Guy Vassall-Adams. For the first intervener: Nigel Giffin QC, Joanne Clement. For the second intervener: Dinah Rose QC, Paul Bowen, Richard Hermer, Alison Gerry, Anna Edmundson. For the third intervener: Tim Owen QC, Jessica Simor.





NAME (wl) Rabone v Pennine Care NHS Trust
CITATION Rabone v Pennine Care NHS Trust [2012] UKSC 2
CIT [2012] UKSC 2
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Human Rights Other Related Subjects: Mental Health; Negligence; Damages; Duty of Care; Extensions of Time; Informal In-Patients; Leave of Absence From Hospital; Mental Patients; Right to Life; Suicide; Victims
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant parents (R) appealed against a decision ([2010] EWCA Civ 698, [2011] Q.B. 1019) that the respondent NHS trust (P) did not have a duty under the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.2 to take reasonable steps to protect their mentally ill daughter (M) from the risk of suicide.
ABSTRACT M had suffered from depression and had been informally admitted to hospital following a suicide attempt. She was assessed as a high risk of suicide but was allowed two days' home leave during which she committed suicide. R brought proceedings against P for negligence and breach of art.2. The negligence claim was settled but the High Court held that there had been no duty on the hospital under art.2. The Court of Appeal dismissed R's appeal. The issues to be determined were (i) whether the art.2 obligation could in principle be owed to a mentally ill hospital patient who was not detained under the Mental Health Act 1983; (ii) if yes, whether there was a "real and immediate" risk to M's life of which P had known or ought to have known and which it failed to take reasonable steps to avoid; (iii) if yes, whether R were "victims" within the meaning of art.34 of the Convention; (iv) if yes, whether R had lost that victim status because P had made adequate redress and had sufficiently acknowledged its breach of duty; (v) if no, whether R's claims were time-barred under the Human Rights Act 1998 s.7(5); (vi) if no, whether the Court of Appeal had erred in holding that it would have awarded 5,000 each to R if their claims had been established.
SUMMARY The European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.2 imposed an operational obligation on states to protect mentally ill patients who were not detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 where there was a real and immediate risk of suicide.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The European Court of Human Rights had not considered whether an operational duty existed to protect against the risk of suicide by informal psychiatric patients. However, the Strasbourg jurisprudence showed that such a duty existed to protect persons from a real and immediate risk of suicide where they were under the state's control, Osman v United Kingdom (23452/94) [1999] 1 F.L.R. 193, Oneryildiz v Turkey (48939/99) (No.1) (2004) 39 E.H.R.R. 12, Powell v United Kingdom (Admissibility) (45305/99) [2000] Inquest L.R. 19 and Savage v South Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust [2008] UKHL 74, [2009] 1 A.C. 681 considered. In the instant case, P owed an operational duty to M to take reasonable steps to protect her from the real and immediate risk of suicide. She had been admitted to hospital as a real suicide risk. She was extremely vulnerable and P had assumed responsibility for her. She was under its control. If she had insisted on leaving the hospital, the authorities could and should have exercised their powers under the 1983 Act to prevent her. In reality, the difference between M's position and that of a hypothetical detained psychiatric patient in similar circumstances was one of form, not substance. M's position was far closer to that of such a hypothetical patient than to a patient undergoing treatment in a public hospital for a physical illness. Those factors led to the conclusion that the operational duty existed in M's case (see paras 15-34 of judgment). (2) There was a real risk that M would take her life when allowed home. That risk existed when she left hospital and continued and increased during the two days, which was sufficient to make the risk immediate. P were or ought to have been aware of that risk. The standard demanded for the performance of the operational duty was one of reasonableness, which included "consideration of the circumstances of the case, the ease or difficulty of taking precautions and the resources available", Officer L, Re [2007] UKHL 36, [2007] 1 W.L.R. 2135 applied. The decision to allow M two days' home leave was one that no reasonable psychiatric practitioner would have made. P had failed to do all that could reasonably have been expected to prevent the real and immediate risk of M's suicide (paras 35-43). (3) The ECtHR had repeatedly stated that family members could bring claims in their own right in relation to the investigative and substantive obligations under art.2 (paras 44-48). (4) R had not renounced an art.2 claim by settling the negligence claim. No such claim had been made in the negligence proceedings because it was not available in English law. In the absence of an express renunciation, the settlement had no legal effect on R's status as victims for the purposes of their art.2 claim. There had been no adequate redress as there had been no compensation at all for the non-pecuniary damage suffered by R as a result of the breach of art.2, Bubbins v United Kingdom (50196/99) (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 24 considered. Had it been necessary to decide the issue, P had in substance acknowledged its breach of the art.2 duty (paras 49-63, 64-72). (5) The extension of time would be granted. The required extension was short, P had suffered no prejudice by the delay, R had acted reasonably and, most importantly, they had a good claim for breach of art.2 (paras 73-79). (6) R had expressed their anxiety to the hospital about the dangers of allowing M home. That must have made M's death all the more distressing. It was a bad breach of the art.2 duty, which merited an award well above the lower end of the range. R would be awarded 5,000 each (paras 80-88).
JUDGE Lord Walker JSC; Lady Hale JSC; Lord Brown JSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Dyson JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Jenni Richards QC, Nigel Poole. For the respondent: Monica Carss-Frisk QC, Jane Mulcahy. For the interveners: Paul Bowen, Alison Pickup.





NAME (wl) Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire
CITATION Robinson v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [2014] EWCA Civ 15
CIT [2014] EWCA Civ 15
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Police; Arrest; Damages; Duty of Care; Immunity From Suit; Negligence; Personal Injury; Police Officers
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (R) appealed against a decision that the respondent chief constable was not liable to her in negligence for damages for personal injury.
ABSTRACT R became caught up in the arrest of a drug dealer when she was walking down a busy high street. She was knocked to the ground and injured. The judge found that there had been negligence, although not outrageous negligence, on the part of the police officers involved in the arrest, but that the immunity from suit for officers engaged in the apprehension of criminals applied. Accordingly, despite the finding of negligence, the claim was dismissed.
ABSTRACT R argued that the judge was wrong in law to apply the three-stage test in Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 where the case involved direct physical harm, public policy considerations did not arise and there was no need for the court to ask itself whether it was fair, just and reasonable for the action to proceed. Further, that he was wrong in law to apply a blanket immunity and to find that it required "outrageous negligence" to defeat the principle in Hill v Chief Constable of West Yorkshire [1989] A.C. 53.
SUMMARY A victim of crime was not allowed to proceed with her claim in negligence for damages for personal injuries against police officers engaged in the apprehension of an offender. The test in Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 applied and, in the circumstances, the police did not owe her a duty of care.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD The basic principle was that where there was a wrong there should be a remedy. However, there were cases where it would not be fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care and the interests of the public at large could outweigh the interests of the individual allegedly wronged (see para.39 of judgment). The Caparo test applied to all claims in the modern law of negligence, and was reflected in all the most recent appellate decisions which addressed in turn, whatever the nature of the harm, the issues of foreseeability, proximity and whether it was just and reasonable to impose a duty, Caparo applied (para.42). The Hill principle was designed to prevent defensive policing and better protect the public. It would fundamentally undermine that objective to make the police liable for direct acts but not indirect acts, and would encourage the police to avoid positive action for fear of being sued (para.44). The general principle was that most claims against the police in negligence for their acts or omissions in the course of investigating and suppressing crime and apprehending offenders would fail the third stage of the Caparo test. It would not be fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty where the courts had concluded that the interests of the public would not be best served by imposing a duty to individuals, Hill, Brooks v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2005] UKHL 24, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1495 and Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire [2008] UKHL 50, [2009] 1 A.C. 225 applied (para.46). However, the Hill principle did not impose a blanket immunity. While there was no definitive list of possible exceptions, there were exceptional cases in which the police did owe a duty of care even when suppressing and investigating crime, Rigby v Chief Constable of Northamptonshire [1985] 1 W.L.R. 1242 considered. In principle, although there was sense in exempting cases of outrageous negligence on the basis no one wished to encourage grossly reckless police operations, such claims would be on the margins. A careful analysis of the case law would provide a sufficient degee of certainty. Accordingly, the Caparo test did apply to the instant case. It would not be fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty on police officers doing their best to get a drug dealer off the street safely (paras 48, 50-51, 65-66). The judge recognised that there were a number of exceptions to the Hill principle and only considered whether outrageous negligence was present because the parties had addressed him on it. He did not find that a finding of outrageous negligence was the only way in which the principle could be defeated. The Hill principle did not apply in general to the law of negligence and to the facts of the instant case. The findings that a duty existed and that there was a breach were unsustainable (paras 62-63).
JUDGE Hallett LJ; Sullivan LJ; Arnold J
COUNSEL For the appellant: Ceri Widdett. For the respondent: Ian Skelt.





NAME (wl) Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales
CITATION Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales [2015] UKSC 2
CIT [2015] UKSC 2
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Police Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Human Rights; Duty of Care; Negligence; Police; Police Powers and Duties; Right to Life
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (F) appealed against a decision ([2012] EWCA Civ 981) granting summary judgment to the respondent chief constables on her claim against them in negligence. The chief constables cross-appealed against a decision that a claim by F under ECHR art.2 should proceed to trial.
ABSTRACT F was the administratrix of the estate of the deceased (M). M had made a 999 call from her home in South Wales in the early hours of the morning. The call was picked up by Gwent Police. M told the operator that her ex-partner had assaulted her and that, although he had left, he had threatened to return imminently and kill her. There was a dispute about whether the operator heard the word "kill" or misheard it as "hit". The operator relayed the details of the call to South Wales police, but did not mention the threat to kill. South Wales police downgraded the priority of the call, deeming an immediate response unnecessary. M made a second 999 call about 15 minutes after the first. In it, she could be heard screaming. Police officers arrived at her home within eight minutes of the second call to find that she had been killed by her ex-partner. Data held by South Wales police recorded a history of domestic violence towards M by her ex-partner. F brought claims against Gwent and South Wales police in common law negligence and in respect of ECHR art.2. The Court of Appeal granted summary judgment to the police on the negligence issue, but held that the art.2 claim should proceed to trial. The issues were whether the police (i) owed a common law duty of care to M; (ii) had assumed responsibility to take reasonable care for M's safety; (ii) had, arguably, breached art.2.
SUMMARY The police did not owe a common law duty of care in negligence to a specific member of the public where they were aware, or ought reasonably to have been aware, of a threat to her life or physical safety. Nor did they owe such a duty where a member of the public had given them apparently credible evidence that an identifiable third party presented a specific and imminent threat to her life or physical safety.
HELD Appeal dismissed, cross-appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) (Hale and Kerr JJ.S.C. dissenting) The first issue could be split into two questions. The first was whether the police owed a duty to take reasonable care for the safety of a person where they were aware, or ought reasonably to have been aware, of a threat to her life or physical safety. The answer was no. In general, English law did not impose liability for injury or damage caused by a third party. The courts' refusal to impose a private law duty on the police to exercise reasonable care to safeguard potential victims of crime, except where there had been a representation and reliance, was consistent with the way in which the common law applied to other authorities vested with powers or duties for the protection of the public. No exception was to be made to the ordinary common law principles so as to cover the facts of the instant case. Although statistics about the incidence of domestic violence were shocking, they were not such as to cause the court to create a new category of duty of care. If the foundation of a duty of care was the police's public law duty to preserve the peace, it was hard to see why the duty should be confined to particular potential victims, or to potential victims of a particular kind of breach of the peace. The duty was owed to members of the public at large and did not involve the kind of proximity necessary for the imposition of a private law duty of care. Moreover, it was not clear whether imposing a duty of care in respect of a specific person would improve the police's performance in dealing with domestic violence. It would, however, have potentially significant financial implications for the police and the public purse. The development of a private duty of care was not necessary for compliance with art.2 or art.3, and there was no basis for creating a wider duty in negligence than would arise either under common law principles or under the ECHR, Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire [2008] UKHL 50, [2009] 1 A.C. 225 followed (see paras 97-100, 114-128 of judgment). The second question was whether, where a member of the public had given the police credible evidence that a third party, whose identity and whereabouts were known, presented an imminent threat to her life or physical safety, the police owed her a duty to take reasonable steps to assess the threat and prevent it being executed. Again, the answer was no. Whether there should be a public compensation scheme for the victims of certain types of crime in cases of pure omission by the police was for Parliament to determine (paras 129-130). (2) The call handler had said nothing to M to give rise to an assumption of responsibility. She had made no promise about how quickly South Wales police would respond, and she had not said anything that amounted to an instruction to stay in the house, Kent v Griffiths (No.3) [2001] Q.B. 36 considered (para.138). (3) The art.2 claim turned on whether the call handler ought to have heard M say that there had been a threat to kill. That was a question of fact, and it would be rare for the instant court to reverse concurrent findings of two lower courts on a question of fact. What the call handler ought to have made of the 999 call was properly a matter for investigation at trial (para.139).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Kerr JSC; Lord Reed JSC; Lord Toulson JSC; Lord Hodge JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Nicholas Bowen QC, Duncan Fairgrieve, Jude Bunting. For the respondents: Lord Pannick QC, Jeremy Johnson. For the interveners Refuge and Liberty: Karon Monaghan QC, Rajeev Thacker. For the intervener Welsh Women's Aid: Caoilfhionn Gallagher, Conor McCarthy.





NAME (wl) Roe v Minister of Health
CITATION Roe v Minister of Health [2016] UKSC 8
CIT [2016] UKSC 8
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Criminal Law; Accessories; Joint Enterprise; Murder
ABSTRACT In conjoined appeals against decisions ([2013] EWCA Crim 1433) upholding convictions for murder, the Supreme Court was asked to review the doctrine of parasitic accessory liability, which had been laid down by the Privy Council in Chan Wing Siu v R. [1985] A.C. 168.
ABSTRACT In Chan Wing Siu , it was held that if two people set out to commit an offence and in the course of that joint enterprise one of them (D1) committed another offence (crime B), the second person would be guilty as an accessory to crime B if he had foreseen the possibility that D1 might act as he did.
SUMMARY The doctrine of parasitic accessory liability, laid down by the Privy Council in Chan Wing Siu v R. [1985] A.C. 168, could not be supported. The Supreme Court re-stated the principles concerning the liability of accessories or secondary parties.
HELD Appeals allowed.
HELD The Chan Wing Siu principle could not be supported. The introduction of the principle was based on an incomplete, and in some respects erroneous, reading of the previous case law, coupled with generalised and questionable policy arguments. Reversing a statement of principle which had been made and followed by the Privy Council and the House of Lords on a number of occasions was a big step, but it was right to do so for several reasons. First, the court had had the benefit of a much fuller analysis than on previous occasions when the topic was considered. Second, it could not be said that the law was now well established and working satisfactorily; it remained highly controversial and a continuing source of difficulty for trial judges. Third, secondary liability was an important part of the common law, and if a wrong turn had been taken, it should be corrected. Fourth, in the common law foresight of what might happen was ordinarily no more than evidence from which a jury could infer the presence of a requisite intention. It might be strong evidence, but its adoption as a test for the mental element for murder in the case of a secondary party was a serious and anomalous departure from the basic rule, which resulted in an over-extension of the law of murder and a reduction of the law of manslaughter. Murder already had a relatively low mens rea threshold, as it included an intention to cause serious injury, without intent to kill or to cause risk to life. The Chan Wing Siu principle extended liability for murder to a secondary party on the basis of a still lesser degree of culpability, namely foresight only of the possibility that the principal might commit murder but without there being any need for an intention to assist him to do so. Fifth, the rule had the striking anomaly of requiring a lower mental threshold for guilt in the case of the accessory than in the case of the principal, Chan Wing Siu disapproved. It would not be satisfactory for the court simply to disapprove the Chan Wing Siu principle. Those concerned with criminal justice, including members of the public, were entitled to expect a clear statement of the relevant principles. The proper course was to re-state the principles which had been established over many years before the law took a wrong turn. The error was to equate foresight with intent to assist, as a matter of law; the correct approach was to treat foresight as evidence of intent. The long-standing practice, before Chan Wing Siu , of inferring intent to assist from a common criminal purpose which included the further crime, if the occasion for it were to arise, was always a legitimate one; what was illegitimate was to treat foresight as an inevitable yardstick of common purpose. The court proceeded to re-state the relevant principles. It also addressed the potential impact of the instant decision on past convictions (see paras 79-84, 87-100 of judgment).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Hughes JSC; Lord Toulson JSC; Lord Thomas LCJ
COUNSEL For the appellant Jogee: Felicity Gerry QC, Catarina Sjolin, Adam Wagner, Diarmuid Laffan. For the appellant Ruddock: Julian Knowles QC, James Mehigan. For the Crown in Jogee: John McGuinness QC, Duncan Atkinson. For the Crown in Ruddock: Howard Stevens QC, Rowan Pennington-Benton. For the intervener (Just for Kids Law): Francis Fitzgibbon QC, Caoilfhionn Gallagher, Joanne Cecil, Daniella Waddoup. For the intervener (Joint Enterprise Not Guilty by Association): Timothy Moloney QC, Jude Bunting.





NAME (wl) Harris v Perry and another
CITATION Harris v Perry and another [2008] EWCA Civ 907
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 907
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury; Accidents; Breach of Duty of Care; Children; Standard of Care; Supervision
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant husband and wife (T and P) appealed against a decision ( [2008] EWHC 990 (QB), (2008) 105(21) L.S.G. 22 ) that they were liable in negligence to the respondent (H), who had been seriously injured whilst playing on a bouncy castle.
ABSTRACT The appellants had hired the bouncy castle for the 10th birthday party of their children. The castle was of a size suitable for adults as well as children. It was pitched on a school playing field outside their back garden. Before the party children, including H, who was then 11, were playing on the castle. H was not invited to the party but P had given him permission to play on the castle. While playing on the castle H had been struck on the head by the heel of a much taller and older boy performing a somersault. H had suffered a depressed skull fracture and subdural haematoma. H's accident occurred when P's back was turned. She had gone to help another child. The judge held that P's duty of care required her to maintain uninterrupted supervision of the castle and that if she had done so she would have prevented the somersault and therefore the accident. He further held that P should not have let H and other bigger children use the castle at the same time.
ABSTRACT The appellants submitted that the judge had applied too strict a test in holding that P's duty of care was to maintain a continuous watch on the castle, and was wrong to hold that P could have stopped the somersault in time to prevent the accident.
SUMMARY A judge imposed too high a standard of care in holding that a bouncy castle required uninterrupted supervision and that it was a breach of duty to allow children of different sizes to play together on it.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) It was impossible to preclude all risk that, when playing together, children might injure themselves or each other. It was quite impractical for parents to keep children under constant supervision and it would not be in the public interest for the law to impose a duty upon them to do so. Some activities however involved an unacceptable risk to children unless they were subject to supervision. The standard of care required in the circumstances was that which a reasonably careful parent would have shown for her own children, or, which was the same thing, to act as would any reasonable provider and supervisor of that kind of inflatable for use by young children. In considering the precautions that should have been taken the judge should have had regard to any information in the hire agreement, which P had read, but wrongly had regard to other documents which P neither saw nor ought to have seen. The judge had erred and the appeal court had to form its own view. (2) The hire agreement recommended that the equipment should be supervised at all times and that boisterous behaviour should be stopped. A reasonable parent could foresee that boisterous behaviour might lead to injury but it was not reasonably foreseeable that such injury would be likely to be serious, let alone as severe as the injury sustained by H. Therefore the standard of care called for on the part of P was that appropriate to protect children against a foreseeable risk of physical harm that fell short of serious injury. (3) If the risk that should have been foreseen by a reasonable parent was injury that was not serious, there could be no justification for holding that the duty of care required children playing on a bouncy castle to be kept under constant surveillance. A responsible adult should have been in the vicinity of the castle to intervene if those playing on it got boisterous, but did not have to watch them continuously to ensure that their behaviour never became boisterous. The judge imposed too high a standard of care in holding that a bouncy castle required uninterrupted supervision. (4) It was doubtful whether P could have prevented the accident if she had been keeping the bouncy castle under constant surveillance. The issue was academic since the accident had occurred during a short period when, without fault, she was concentrating her attention elsewhere. (5) The judge also applied too high a standard of care when concluding that P was in breach of duty in allowing children of different sizes to play on the castle.
JUDGE Lord Phillips LCJ; May LJ; Wilson LJ
COUNSEL For the appellants: Graham Eklund QC. For the respondent: Susan Rodway QC.





NAME (wl) Williams v University of Birmingham
CITATION Williams v University of Birmingham [2011] EWCA Civ 1242
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 1242
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Asbestos; Breach of Duty of Care; Causation; Foreseeability; Mesothelioma
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant university (U) appealed against a decision that it was liable to the estate and dependants of a former student (W) who had died of malignant mesothelioma.
ABSTRACT W had carried out scientific experiments in a tunnel underneath university buildings in 1974 in his final year as an undergraduate. The tunnel contained central heating pipes which were lagged with asbestos lagging. Tests on dust residues from the tunnel found all forms of asbestos in the dust and U admitted that W would have received some exposure to asbestos whilst carrying out the experiments. The judge found that W's visits to the tunnel were such that there was a material increase in the risk of his contracting mesothelioma as a result. In those circumstances there was a breach of duty and U was negligent. U argued that as a matter of causation the university exposure was so small compared with other exposures to asbestos to which W might have been subject that it had to be regarded as de minimis. The judge rejected that argument and gave judgment for damages to be assessed.
ABSTRACT U submitted that it could only be in breach of its duty of care to W if it should reasonably have foreseen at the relevant time that permitting him to do the experiments in the tunnel would expose him to the risk of asbestos-related injury because of the state of the asbestos lagging and/or the existence of dust in the tunnel. The judge had erred in her approach to the issue of breach of duty by considering the question of whether W's exposure in the tunnel was more than de minimis because that question was relevant to causation and not to whether there had been a breach of duty. U further submitted that the judge had not made any finding that the condition of the lagging in the tunnel at the relevant time was such as should have alerted U to a reasonably foreseeable risk of asbestos-related injury to people using the tunnel.
SUMMARY The correct test for breach of duty in a mesothelioma case was not whether the defendant had taken reasonable measures to ensure that the claimant or victim was not exposed to a material increase in the risk of mesothelioma. The duty was to take reasonable care, including measures if necessary, to ensure that a person was not exposed to a foreseeable risk of asbestos related injury.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The test for whether U was negligent and in breach of duty was whether it ought reasonably to have foreseen the risk of contracting mesothelioma arising from W's exposure to asbestos fibres by undertaking the experiments in the tunnel to the extent that it should have refused to allow the experiments to be done or taken further precautions or at the least sought advice, Asmussen v Filtrona United Kingdom Ltd [2011] EWHC 1734 (QB) considered (see para.35 of judgment). (2) The question of what U ought reasonably to have foreseen about the consequences of any exposure to asbestos fibres in the course of experiments in the tunnel and the reasonable conduct that U ought to have adopted had to be judged by reference to the state of knowledge and practice as at 1974, Baker v Quantum Clothing Group Ltd [2011] UKSC 17, [2011] 1 W.L.R. 1003 applied (para.36). (3) The judge did not ask the correct question when considering whether U was in breach of duty by asking whether there had been a material increase in the risk. There was nothing in the relevant authorities to suggest that the breach of duty test had been altered in mesothelioma cases so that a claimant only had to demonstrate that the defendant failed to take reasonable steps to ensure that the claimant or victim was not exposed to a material increase in the risk of mesothelioma, Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 and Sienkiewicz v Greif (UK) Ltd [2011] UKSC 10, [2011] 2 A.C. 229 considered (paras 39-45). (4) There was just sufficient evidence for the judge properly to make the finding that, on the balance of probability, the lagging was in poor condition in 1974 (para.52). However, on the then state of knowledge it had not been shown that, at the level of exposure to asbestos fibres actually found by the judge, U ought reasonably to have foreseen that W would be exposed to an unacceptable risk of asbestos related injury. Therefore the judge's finding of breach of duty could not stand (paras 60-62). (5) The judge had not posed the correct legal test on causation, but she had concluded as a matter of fact that the exposure of W to asbestos fibres in the tunnel was such as materially to increase his risk of contracting mesothelioma so that causation had been proved (para.78).
JUDGE Maurice Kay LJ; Aikens LJ; Patten LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Charles Feeny. For the respondent: Julian Goose QC.





NAME (wl) Watt v Hertfordshire
CITATION Watt v Hertfordshire [2016] EWCA Civ 371
CIT [2016] EWCA Civ 371
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Company Law Other Related Subjects: Hospitality and Leisure; Insolvency; Breach of Fiduciary Duty; Conflict of Interest; Directors' Powers and Duties; Dishonest Assistance; Fraudulent Dealing; Liquidation; Misapplication; Tour Operators
ABSTRACT The second, fourth, fifth and sixth appellants appealed against findings of fact in the respondent company's claim ((2014) EWHC 1587 (Ch)) that they had dishonestly assisted the first appellant company director in breaching his fiduciary duties and the Companies Act 2006 s.175.
ABSTRACT The company (G) was a tour operator and the director, who owned 100 % of the company, had attempted to sell 50% of his shares to each of two companies without the one knowing about the other. G went into liquidation leaving passengers stranded overseas and owing 20 million for repatriation. The judge found that the appellants had dishonestly assisted the director to breach his duties to G by diverting to himself 1.4 million which would otherwise have been due to G. The judge decided that that money would have been paid to G as payment for an opportunity, namely entering into a five-year seat commitment with an airline. She also found that they had dishonestly assisted the director in misapplying 1.25 million of G's money for airline seats which was diverted to a Seychelles company owned by the director. She held that they were only liable to compensate G for the loss that it had suffered, rather than for the profit that the director made, but she rejected the contention that G's equitable compensation should be reduced by 500,000 for flight seats that had been recouped.
ABSTRACT The appellants submitted that the judge had unfairly approached the case and had allowed the liquidators to pursue an unpleaded case that they never intended to repay 750,000 of the deposits paid by G for airline seats so that they were unfairly disadvantaged in adducing evidence. They argued that the judge's findings ignored commercial common sense.
SUMMARY In deciding equitable compensation for dishonestly assisting a company director in breaching his fiduciary duties, the dishonest assisters were not liable to compensate the company for the misapplication of money which had been recouped before the company's liquidation. The misapplication of that money had not caused the company any loss because it had been repaid.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The judge's reasoning in concluding that there was an opportunity of which G was deprived by the director was entirely convincing. Her findings were not perverse. The judge's finding that the opportunity was worth 1.4 million did not ignore commercial common sense. The liquidators alleged that the 1.4 million had been paid for the five-year seat commitment and that was sufficient to establish what it was worth. There was no evidential lacuna. There was no lack of nexus between the alleged dishonesty and the alleged assistance. The issue of whether the deposits were a genuine part of the seat sale agreements was plainly put in issue by the pleadings and the judge was justified in allowing the liquidators to assert in the course of the trial that the deposits were not truly intended by the parties to be repayable. The judge had not behaved unfairly. The appeal on the findings of fact failed (see paras 34, 36, 40, 50, 60, 69-70 of judgment).
HELD (2) The judge had addressed the wrong question when deciding not to reduce G's equitable compensation for the recouped 500,000. The question was whether the appellants as dishonest assisters of the director in the misapplication of G's monies should be required to compensate G for the loss of the extra 500,000 that G had in fact recovered. The director's misapplication of G's 500,000 did not cause G any loss because it was repaid. The appellants succeeded in reducing the award of equitable compensation for their dishonest assistance in the misapplication of G's monies from 1.25 million to 750,000 (para.64).
JUDGE Longmore LJ; Kitchin LJ; Vos LJ
COUNSEL For the second, fourth, fifth and sixth defendants/appellants: David Eaton Turner. For the respondent: Hilary Stonefrost.





NAME (wl) The Scout Association v Barnes
CITATION The Scout Association v Barnes [2010] EWCA Civ 1476
CIT [2010] EWCA Civ 1476
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Associations; Games; Personal Injury; Reasonable Care; Risk
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant association (S) appealed against a decision that it was liable for damages for personal injuries suffered by the respondent (B).
ABSTRACT B, who was 13 years' old at the time, had been injured whilst playing a game called "Objects in the Dark" at a scout meeting. The game was organised by the scout leader; blocks were placed in the centre of a room whilst players ran around. Half the main lights were turned off and, at any given moment, the remainder of the lights would be turned off and the players would rush to the middle of the room and grab a block: there were not enough blocks for every player. Rounds were played until one boy was left holding a block and declared the winner. The game was similar to another game which was played with the lights on. In the course of playing the game, B collided with a bench, injuring his head and left shoulder. He recovered from his head injury within two weeks, but the shoulder injury persisted and required physiotherapy. In the event, he made a full recovery. The judge determined that turning the lights off had introduced an unacceptable degree of risk to the game.
ABSTRACT S submitted that (1) the risks associated with playing the game were no different to those that existed when playing with the lights on; (2) in his evaluation, the judge failed to take account of or failed to give sufficient weight to the social value of the activity.
SUMMARY Whether the social benefit of an activity was such that the degree of risk it entailed was acceptable was a question of fact, degree and judgment which had to be decided on an individual basis. In that context, a judge had been correct to conclude that playing a potentially risky game in the dark unacceptably increased the foreseeable risk of injuries occurring.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The risks associated with playing the same game in a lighted room were increased when the lights were switched off. It could not be said that B would have suffered the same accident if there had been full illumination (see paras 22-25 of judgment). (2) (Jackson L.J. dissenting) It was clear that the judge had very clearly in mind the well-established principle that the social value of an activity was a relevant consideration, Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2003] UKHL 47, [2004] 1 A.C. 46 and Bolton v Stone [1951] A.C. 850 applied. Everyone accepted that scouting activities were valuable to society and that they often, and properly, carried some elements of risk. However, that did not render every scouting activity, however risky, acceptable. In the instant case, the judge rightly concluded that playing in the dark significantly increased those risks and that the only justification was the additional excitement. Darkness added no other social or educative value. The fact that the judge did not say so explicitly could not undermine his overall conclusion. Whether the social benefit of an activity was such that the degree of risk it entailed was acceptable was a question of fact, degree and judgment which had to be decided on an individual basis. The judge did that and his conclusion should be respected (paras 38, 46-49, 60).
HELD 
JUDGE Ward LJ; Smith LJ; Jackson LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Patrick Field QC, David Boyle. For the respondent: Bruce Silvester.





NAME (wl) Sutcliffe v BMI Healthcare
CITATION Sutcliffe v BMI Healthcare [2007] EWCA Civ 476
CIT [2007] EWCA Civ 476
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Brain Damage; Breach of Duty of Care; Causation; Clinical Negligence; Expert Evidence; Hospitals
ABSTRACT The appellant (S) appealed against the dismissal of his negligence claim against the respondent hospital (B) in respect of personal injuries sustained after a routine knee operation.
ABSTRACT Following the successful performance of the operation, during which S was given a general anaesthetic, S was taken to a recovery area, where it was noted that his oxygen saturation levels had dropped to 90 per cent. S was nonetheless discharged to a hospital ward, where he remained overnight. S was able to self-administer morphine. At 06.00, the nursing staff observed that S was asleep and, as he had not slept for most of the night, decided not to wake him to carry out vital signs monitoring. He subsequently suffered severe and permanent hypoxic brain damage which the parties agreed had resulted from regurgitated gastric contents being aspirated into his lungs. Because S was in a deep sleep and had been affected by the morphine, his gag reflex had been impaired. The judge below had found that in deciding not to perform vital signs monitoring, the nursing staff had exercised reasonable clinical judgement, in accordance with a reasonable body of nursing opinion. Furthermore, based on the opinion evidence of a preferred anaesthetist expert, the judge had found that even if the nurses had carried out the vital signs observations, they would have been able to rouse S, but the aspiration and resulting brain damage would still have occurred.
ABSTRACT S submitted that (1) the cause of the injury could be traced back to negligence in the recovery room following the operation, when oxygen saturation was measured at 90 per cent, but no remedial action was taken. But for that initial negligence, S would not have been regarded as a routine patient and his levels of consciousness would have been monitored; (2) the judge had been wrong to accept a nurse's evidence that it was reasonably justifiable nursing practice to have left S to sleep without monitoring, which should have included observations on his levels of consciousness and rousability. That monitoring would have detected a reduced level of consciousness in time to take remedial action before the brain damaging aspiration occurred. Based on the principles propounded in Bolitho (Deceased) v City and Hackney HA [1998] A.C. 232, the judge should have rejected the nurse's opinion as not having a logical basis, and therefore not representing a body of responsible opinion, as the risks of not performing those observations had far outweighed any risk of performing them; (3) the judge had erred in failing to recognise that there were degrees of rousability, and that S's consciousness should have been assessed with this in mind. Specifically, the judge had been wrong to accept and prefer the opinion evidence of the expert anaesthetist, that although the morphine had suppressed the gag and cough reflex, it would not have made S unrousable. S's level of consciousness could be judged from the fact that he did not cough or wake up when he vomited.
SUMMARY In circumstances where, following a failure by nursing staff to monitor a patient's vital signs following a routine knee operation, the patient had suffered brain damage as a result of vomit aspirating into his lungs, the judge had been entitled to rely on the opinion evidence of an anaesthetist expert witness in finding that there was no causative link between the omission and the injury.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The judge had been entitled to find, on the evidence, that S's oxygen saturation must have recovered on the ward during the night, and well before 06.00. (2) The lack of vital signs monitoring by nursing staff did not involve questions of diagnosis and treatment. The risk had been that S might not in fact have had a satisfactory normal pulse, temperature or blood pressure, but the judge had accepted that, at the relevant time, on the evidence they would have been within normal limits. As the risks involved were not of the kind that fell for consideration under the principles set out in Bolitho , they were therefore irrelevant, Bolitho considered. The nurse's opinion, that it had been within proper nursing competence to leave S without making those observations, had a logical basis, in that it had been reasonable to decide to let a patient who had had little sleep since his operation continue to sleep. It was plain that the nurse had weighed up the risks and benefits. (3) It was clear that the judge had dealt with degrees of rousability. The judge's finding as regards S's rousability after 06.00, which was critical to the issue of causation and to his conclusions, had a firm evidential base, and had not been shown to be wrong. The judge had been entitled to accept the expert anaesthetist's opinion as (a) the judge had been entitled to regard him as in general the more persuasive of the expert anaesthetists; (b) expert witnesses from other disciplines had deferred to the anaesthetists on the critical issues in the instant case; (c) the preferred expert had experience of the effect of morphine in the quantities taken by S on consciousness and levels of sedation. He was therefore entitled to say, based on his experience and opinion, that the amount of morphine taken by S would not make a patient such as him deeply unconscious; (d) if morphine did suppress the gag and cough reflex, it was not illogical for it to do so when the effect on a patient's consciousness was less than profound, because a reflex was an action or function that occurred apart from consciousness; (e) the preferred expert's evidence was supported by that of another expert, who had referred to S's breathing rate as indicative that his consciousness was not severely depressed.
JUDGE Auld LJ; May LJ; Longmore LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: John Grace QC, Laura Davidson. For the respondent: Susan Rodway QC, Vikram Sachdeva.





NAME (wl) Pierce v Doncaster MBC
CITATION Pierce v Doncaster MBC [2008] EWCA Civ 1416
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 1416
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Local Government; Civil Procedure; Negligence; Breach of Duty of Care; Children'S Welfare; Limitations; Local Authorities' Powers and Duties; Negligence; Social Work Records
ABSTRACT The appellant local authority appealed against a decision that it had negligently returned the respondent (P) to his family after a period in care as an infant.
ABSTRACT P had been born into an emotionally and financially unstable household. His mother and father (M and F) were not married to one another, but were living together, although they had periods of brief separation. During a hospital visit when P was around six months old, he had showed signs of neglect, and for the second time he was taken into voluntary care under the Children Act 1948 s.1. Whilst P was still in care, it was clear that M and F's situation was unsatisfactory. Their house was often dirty. F was usually out of work and went to prison at one point. F also failed to visit P, and M's visits were occasional and disorganised. At about 14 months old P was returned to his family, where he lived until he left home at the age of 14 to fend for himself. He showed signs of personality disorder. His behaviour was sexualised and included living rough as a rent boy, and there were episodes of theft and arson. P claimed that in the years following his return to his family he suffered indifference, neglect and periodic violence, and in his late twenties he claimed damages for the local authority's failure to keep him in care. The court held that, in the circumstances, the authority had been negligent. The issues in the instant case were whether (i) there was a basis for finding a breach of duty when P was returned to his home; (ii) if so, there was a basis for finding that the breach caused P to remain in his family for years when otherwise he would have not; (iii) if so, damages for injury by violence as distinct from negligence were recoverable; (iv) the trial judge misdirected himself upon the Limitation Act 1980 s.14(3).
SUMMARY Where an individual who had suffered neglect from his family as an infant had obtained his care records from the local authority and subsequently issued proceedings on the grounds that the authority had negligently failed to take him into care when he was younger, the individual had had constructive knowledge of the authority's breach of care under the Limitation Act 1980 s.14(3) several years earlier, as he had been given the opportunity to see the care records previously, but had declined to do so.
HELD Appeal allowed in part.
HELD (1) The judge's conclusion that it had been negligent to return P was founded upon expert evidence that stated that no reasonable local authority, properly assessing the case, could have reached a decision to permit return, and that the only proper course would have been to seek compulsory powers for P to remain in care if M did not agree. It was clear that the judge had applied the relevant tests, and such a conclusion was not inconsistent with the proposition that care proceedings would not necessarily have succeeded following various later incidents. Accordingly, there was evidential support for the judge's conclusion. (2) The judge had also held that if P had not been returned home when he was, it was likely that he would have remained in care indefinitely. On the evidence, it was clear that everyone proceeded upon the basis that if the authority ought not to have returned P when it did, there was no realistic scope for a later return. Further, there had been no evidence from the authority that, had P not been returned, there would have been an attempt to return him later. (3) Although the instant case was a case of neglect rather than that of violence or abuse, the foreseeable loss had been injury through bad parenting, and it was impossible to say that the judge's award lay outside the bracket properly available to him. (4) The judge had held that P's knowledge of the authority's breach was through the consideration of his care records, that he had only been able to obtain shortly before he issued the proceedings, and therefore he was within the limitation period. However, P had requested his file several years earlier, and the authority had offered to pay for his train fare for him to go and view them, but he failed to take up the appointments. Accordingly, it was clear that P had had constructive knowledge under s.14(3) of the 1980 Act, and his claim was out of time. It followed that the matter would be remitted to consider the issue of discretionary extension of time under s.33 of the 1980 Act.
JUDGE Sedley LJ; Hughes LJ; Hedley J
COUNSEL For the appellant: Michael Kent QC, Catherine Foster. For the respondent: Elizabeth-Anne Gumbel QC, H Witcomb.





NAME (wl) Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board
CITATION Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] UKSC 11
CIT [2015] UKSC 11
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Health; Birth Defects; Bolam Test; Causation; Clinical Negligence; Consent to Treatment; Doctors; Duty of Care; Medical Advice; Patients' Rights; Risk; Scotland
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (M) appealed against a decision ([2013] CSIH 3, 2013 S.C. 245) upholding the dismissal of her claim in negligence brought against the respondent health board in relation to her antenatal care.
ABSTRACT M had been treated by a consultant obstetrician (C) during her pregnancy because she was diabetic, and was therefore likely to have a large baby. The risk of shoulder dystocia occurring was 9 to 10 per cent, but C did not inform M of the risk because, in her estimation, the risk of a grave problem for the baby arising as a result of shoulder dystocia was very small. During the delivery, shoulder dystocia occurred and the baby was deprived of oxygen due to occlusion of the umbilical cord. He was born with severe disabilities. It was M's case that she should have been advised about the risk of shoulder dystocia, and of the alternative possibility of delivery by caesarean section. The Court of Session rejected that argument, following the approach in Sidaway v Board of Governors of the Bethlem Royal Hospital [1985] A.C. 871, namely that the question of whether a doctor's omission to advise a patient of risks involved in treatment amounted to a breach of duty of care should be decided primarily on the basis of expert medical evidence, applying the Bolam test. It also concluded that, even if M had been advised about the risk of serious harm to her baby as a consequence of shoulder dystocia, she would not have opted for a caesarean.
SUMMARY The analysis of the law by the majority in Sidaway v Board of Governors of the Bethlem Royal Hospital [1985] A.C. 871 was unsatisfactory. An adult person of sound mind was entitled to decide which, if any, of the available forms of treatment to undergo, and her consent had to be obtained before treatment interfering with her bodily integrity was undertaken. Doctors were under a duty to take reasonable care to ensure that patients were aware of any material risks involved in any recommended treatment, and of any reasonable alternative or variant treatments.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) Lord Scarman's dissenting judgment in Sidaway took as a starting point the patient's basic human right to make his own decision. He held that if a patient suffered damage as a result of an undisclosed risk which would have been disclosed by a doctor exercising reasonable care to respect the patient's right to decide whether to incur the risk, and the patient would have avoided the injury if the risk had been disclosed, then the patient would have a cause of action based in negligence. In England and Wales, lower courts had tacitly ceased to apply the Bolam test in relation to the advice given by doctors to their patients, and had effectively adopted Lord Scarman's approach, Pearce v United Bristol Healthcare NHS Trust [1999] E.C.C. 167 approved, Wyatt v Curtis [2003] EWCA Civ 1779 considered. In Chester v Afshar [2004] UKHL 41, [2005] 1 A.C. 134, Lord Walker observed that during the time which had elapsed since Sidaway , the importance of personal autonomy had been more widely recognised, and that, in making a decision which might have a profound effect on her health and wellbeing, a patient was entitled to information and advice about possible alternative or variant treatments, Chester applied. Recent guidance issued by the Department of Health and the General Medical Council had treated Chester as the leading authority. It had become increasingly clear that the paradigm of the doctor-patient relationship implicit in the speeches in Sidaway had ceased to reflect the reality and complexity of the way in which healthcare services were provided, or the way in which the providers and recipients of such services viewed their relationship. Under the stimulus of the Human Rights Act 1998, the courts had become increasingly conscious of the extent to which the common law reflected fundamental values, including the value of self-determination. The analysis of the law by the majority in Sidaway was unsatisfactory, in so far as it treated the doctor's duty to advise the patient of the risks of proposed treatment as falling within the scope of the Bolam test, subject to two qualifications of that general principle, neither of which was fundamentally consistent with that test. There was no reason to perpetuate the application of the Bolam test in that context any longer. An adult person of sound mind was entitled to decide which, if any, of the available forms of treatment to undergo, and her consent had to be obtained before treatment interfering with her bodily integrity was undertaken. The doctor was under a duty to take reasonable care to ensure that the patient was aware of any material risks involved in any recommended treatment, and of any reasonable alternative or variant treatments. The test of materiality was whether, in the circumstances, a reasonable person in the patient's position would be likely to attach significance to the risk, or the doctor was or should reasonably be aware that the particular patient would be likely to attach significance to it (see paras 39-87 of judgment). (2) There was no doubt that it was incumbent on C to advise M of the substantial risk of shoulder dystocia if a vaginal delivery were attempted, and to discuss with her the alternative of a caesarean section. The Court of Session had erred in focusing upon the consequent risk that the baby might suffer a grave injury, which was relatively small (para.94). (3) There was a compelling reason for concluding that the Court of Session had failed to consider relevant evidence in relation to causation, Thomas v Thomas [1947] A.C. 484 considered. The only conclusion available was that, had C advised M of the risk of shoulder dystocia and discussed with her dispassionately the potential consequences, and the alternative of an elective caesarean, M would probably have opted for the caesarean. It was not in dispute that the baby would then have been born unharmed (paras 96-104).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Kerr JSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Wilson JSC; Lord Reed JSC; Lord Hodge JSC
COUNSEL For the appellant: James Badenoch QC, Colin J MacAulay QC, Lauren Sutherland. For the respondent: Rory Anderson QC, Neil R Mackenzie. For the intervener: Andrew Smith QC.





NAME (wl) Mullin v Richards
CITATION Mullin v Richards [1998] 1 WLR 1304
CIT [1998] 1 WLR 1304
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Children; Foreseeability; Personal Injury
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY personal injuries; foreseeability; whether risk foreseeable to 15 year old girl
SUMMARY In February 1988 M and R, two 15 year old schoolgirls, were play fighting with plastic rulers during a class when one of the rulers snapped and a fragment of plastic entered M's right eye causing her to lose all sight in that eye. M commenced proceedings in negligence against R and the education authority. The claim was dismissed against the education authority and upheld against R on the basis that she must have appreciated that what she was doing was dangerous, that she had used excessive violence and that it was readily foreseeable that her conduct might cause an eye injury to M. A 50 per cent reduction was made for contributory negligence. R appealed against the finding of negligence against her contending, inter alia, that there was not sufficient evidence for the finding that it was readily foreseeable that R's conduct might cause an injury of the type that M suffered.
HELD allowing the appeal, that the test of foreseeability in this context is whether an ordinarily prudent and reasonable 15 year old schoolgirl in R's situation would have realised that her actions gave rise to a risk of injury, McHale v Watson (1966) 115 C.L.R. 199, [1965] C.L.Y. 3987 followed, and Gough v Thorne [1966] 1 W.L.R. 1387 considered. A mere possibility of injury was not enough, Bolton v Stone [1951] A.C. 850 applied. The question of foreseeability must be judged against the evidential background concerning the prevalence of the practice of fencing with plastic rulers, the absence of prohibition, the absence of warning against it or of its dangers and the absence of any evidence of any previous injury. Further there was no evidence to support the judge's finding that M and R were guilty of using misdirected and dangerous force over and above that which was inherent in play fencing. Accordingly, the judge erred in finding negligence against R without there being material on which he could properly do so.
JUDGE Butler-Sloss LJ; Hutchison LJ; Sir John Vinelott
COUNSEL For R: Richard Lee. For M: Michael Stephens.





NAME (wl) Orchard v Lee
CITATION Orchard v Lee [2009] EWCA Civ 295
CIT [2009] EWCA Civ 295
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Children; Duty of Care; Foreseeability; Personal Injury
ABSTRACT The appellant (O) appealed against a decision of the county court to dismiss her claim for personal injury against the respondent schoolboy (L).
ABSTRACT L was 13 years old. He was playing tag in the courtyard and part of a walkway that was the designated social area at his school. While he was running backwards he collided with O, who was the lunchtime supervisor, causing her serious injuries. There was no rule against running in the area where the incident occurred. The court held that the incident was a simple accident caused by horseplay. It stated that no ordinarily prudent and reasonable 13-year-old boy would reasonably have foreseen the risk of injury by virtue of the game of tag in question.
SUMMARY A 13-year-old schoolboy was not liable for personal injury caused to a lunchtime supervisor when he collided with her whilst playing a game of tag in an outdoor area. The schoolboy's conduct was simply the conduct to be expected of a 13-year-old boy, and therefore did not amount to conduct in which he would reasonably foresee that there was likely to be injury beyond that normally occurring.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD L's conduct was simply the conduct to be expected of a 13-year-old boy playing tag. No part of his conduct was outside the norm, let alone a significant degree outside it, nor was he breaking any rules. Therefore, his conduct could not be described as being careless to a very high degree, and it was clear that he was not culpable, Mullin v Richards [1998] 1 W.L.R. 1304 and Blake v Galloway [2004] EWCA Civ 814, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 2844 applied, McHale v Watson 115 C.L.R. 199 considered. Further, a reasonable 13-year-old boy would not have anticipated that there was a sufficient probability that the harm actually caused would have resulted, Bolton v Stone [1951] A.C. 850 considered.
JUDGE Waller LJ; Rimer LJ; Aikens LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Anthony Coleman. For the respondent: Benjamin Browne QC, Stephen Archer.





NAME (wl) Knight v Home Office
CITATION Knight v Home Office [1990] 1 WLR 577
CIT [1990] 1 WLR 577
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure; Costs; Misconduct; Plaintiffs
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Costs; misconduct; application to reduce costs; whether notice of application to be given to plaintiff prior to transaction of costs
SUMMARY Where an application is to be made at taxation under Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.62 r.28 for costs to be reduced because of the plaintiff's misconduct, the plaintiff should be given notice to enable the plaintiff to attend and to enable the plaintiff and his advisers to propose a response.
JUDGE Evans J





NAME (wl) Barnett v Chelsea & Kensington Hospital Management Committee
CITATION Barnett v Chelsea & Kensington Hospital Management Committee [1969] 1 QB 428
CIT [1969] 1 QB 428
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Professions; Health; Causation; Duty of Care; Hospitals; Medical Negligence; Poisoning
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Medical practitioners; liability of hospital; casualty department
SUMMARY A hospital authority which provides a casualty department owes a duty of care towards persons presenting themselves there complaining of illness. The deceased drank tea, which had, unknown to him, been contaminated with arsenic; he attended at the casualty department of a hospital complaining that he had been vomiting for three hours after drinking tea. The casualty doctor failed to examine him but sent a message that he should report to his own doctor. About five hours later he died. On his widow's action for damages, held, (1) that the hospital authority owed a duty of care; (2) that the doctor was negligent in failing to examine and admit the deceased, and accordingly there had been a breach of that duty; but (3) that on the facts the deceased's condition was such that he must have died despite any medical attention which the hospital could have given, so that causation was not established and the claim failed. (Dicta of A. L. Smith L.J. in Le Lievre v Gould [1893] 1 Q.B. 491 applied; Cassidy v Ministry of Health [1951] 2 K.B. 343 distinguished.)
JUDGE Nield J





NAME (wl) Cook v Lewis
CITATION Cook v Lewis [2015] EWCA Civ 1003
CIT [2015] EWCA Civ 1003
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Immigration; Exclusion; Foreign Criminals; Interpretation; Refugees
ABSTRACT The appellant (AH) appealed against a decision of the Upper Tribunal upholding the first respondent secretary of state's decision to exclude him from the protection of the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 (United Nations).
ABSTRACT AH was an Algerian national who had been convicted and imprisoned in France for falsifying administrative documents and being a member of an association formed with a view to preparing acts of terrorism. Following his release, he applied for asylum in the UK. He was granted discretionary leave, it being accepted that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Algeria. However, the secretary of state excluded him from the protection of the Convention pursuant to art.1F(b), on the basis that he had been convicted of a serious criminal offence in France. The Upper Tribunal rejected his appeal against the exclusion.
ABSTRACT AH submitted that the Upper Tribunal had erred by not (1) taking into account events since the commission of the offence which expiated his discredit and should have saved him from exclusion; (2) construing the word "serious" in art.1F(b) as meaning "particularly serious"; (3) finding facts which showed that he had such a degree of personal involvement in the crime as to justify his exclusion.
SUMMARY When deciding whether the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 (United Nations) art.1F(b) applied to exclude an asylum seeker from the protection of the Convention on the basis that he had committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge, the secretary of state was not to take account of expiating events occurring after the commission of the offence.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) Both AH and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), intervening, submitted that post-offence events were material to the art.1F(b) decision. AH argued that such events could properly inform the judgment of whether the offence was serious, while the UNHCR submitted that words should be read into art.1F(b) so that it could be disapplied where to do so would be consistent with the Convention's objects and purposes. Both arguments meant that the decision-maker would have to make a series of interlocking evaluations of matters such as the gravity of the offence, the passage of time, the age of the criminal at the time of the offence, the extent to which he posed a danger to the receiving state, any punishment he had suffered, and any atonement he had made. That was a wide-ranging and potentially open-ended exercise which amounted to the kind of proportionality assessment ruled out by the European Court of Justice in the parallel context of Directive 2004/83 art.12. Moreover, the various provisions of art.1 required the decision-maker to decide matters of objective fact and then to apply the exclusion or not, as the case dictated. They did not require him to evaluate the individual's merits. The construction favoured by AH and the UNHCR would involve the decision-maker exercising a power retained by the Convention itself, namely judging whether the asylum seeker should obtain protection. The Convention did not authorise an inquiry into the asylum seeker's character. Rather, it presumed that to give refugee status to anybody who had committed a crime of the stipulated gravity posed a risk to the systemic integrity and viability of refugee law. The mandatory, defining nature of art.1F(b) was confirmed by the Convention's travaux preparatoires, and the Supreme Court had held that the exclusion clauses in the Convention had to be restrictively interpreted and cautiously applied, Al-Sirri v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 54, [2013] 1 A.C. 745 followed. The Supreme Court of Canada had, by a majority, rejected identical submissions to those of AH and the UNHCR in Febles [2014] 3 SCR 431, and its reasoning would be adopted by the instant court, Febles considered (see paras 9-10, 14-15, 18-26, 28-33 of judgment). (2) To justify exclusion under art.1F(b), the offence had to be of the stipulated gravity. The phrase "serious crime" denoted especially grave offending. The word "serious" needed no further qualification, and the draftsman had not intended that it should be qualified by the word "particularly", AH (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 395, [2012] 1 W.L.R. 3469 considered (paras 34-36). (3) There was nothing to suggest that the Upper Tribunal's factual conclusions did not properly reflect the findings of the French court, or that the French court was not entitled to make the findings it did. The Upper Tribunal had properly accorded a significant degree of respect to the French court's decision, but had also recognised that it alone had to decide whether AH's conduct was sufficiently serious to justify exclusion. It concluded that he had knowingly been giving succour to a terrorist cause and had been doing so as a senior participant in the conspiracy. Although its findings lacked particularity, it was entitled to reach the conclusion it did. If it was wrong to presume that mere membership of an organisation with terrorist aims was enough for art.1F(b) to bite, it was also wrong to presume that any particular level of overt activity had to be shown, R. (on the application of JS (Sri Lanka)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 15, [2011] 1 A.C. 184 followed (paras 37-39, 45-47).
JUDGE Laws LJ; Burnett LJ; Sir Colin Rimer
COUNSEL For the appellant: Raza Husain QC, Naina Patel. For the first respondent: Alan Payne. For the second respondent: Michael Fordham QC, Samantha Knights, Jason Pobjoy.





NAME (wl) Jobling v Associated Dairies
CITATION Jobling v Associated Dairies [2016] CSIH 3
CIT [2016] CSIH 3
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Duty of Care; Fire Services; Negligence; Scotland
ABSTRACT A fire service (S) reclaimed against a decision of the Lord Ordinary allowing a proof before answer in an action of damages raised against S by the the heritable proprietors (H) of a farmhouse (F) for damages on the basis of S's alleged negligence in extinguishing a fire at F (A J Allan (Blairnyle) Ltd v Strathclyde Fire Board [2014] CSOH 135).
ABSTRACT On 31 October 2008, S had extinguished a fire at F and had left the scene at approximately 3 pm. H averred that rotten timbers in the roof space had continued to smoulder such that the fire had reignited in the early hours of the morning on 1 November and F had burned down, and that once the fire had appeared to be extinguished, S ought to have used thermal imaging to locate any questionable areas and further ought to have maintained a regular check on F to ensure that the fire had truly been extinguished.
SUMMARY Firefighters attending the scene of a fire did not owe a duty of care to the heritable proprietor where they had assumed responsibility for controlling and extinguishing the fire but had failed to do so; the carefully developed, policy based, more restrictive approach approved and adopted by the Supreme Court had to be followed by the Scottish courts, and the court had to disapprove of Duff v Highlands and Islands Fire Board, 1995 S.L.T. 1362, Gibson v Orr, 1999 S.C. 420 and Burnett v Grampian Fire and Rescue Services, 2007 S.L.T. 61.
HELD Reclaiming motion allowed.
HELD (1) Recent authorities from the House of Lords and Supreme Court had emphasised the requirement for a careful approach to the liability of public authorities to private individuals, the circumstances of the third case in Capital were very similar to the circumstances in the present case, and the Court of Appeal's conclusion, that the fire brigade was not liable, had been specifically approved by the House of Lords in Gorringe v Calderdale Metropolitan Borough Council [2004] 1 W.L.R. 1057 and had not been criticised by the Supreme Court in Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales Police [2015] 2 W.L.R., and the carefully developed, policy based, more restrictive approach, approved and adopted by the Supreme Court, had to be followed by the Scottish courts, contrary to the views expressed in Duff v Highlands and Islands Fire Board, 1995 S.L.T. 1362, Gibson v Orr, 1999 S.C. 420 and Burnett v Grampian Fire and Rescue Services, 2007 S.L.T. 61 but in keeping with Mackay v Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, 2015 S.L.T. 342; (i) the fire service ought not to be regarded as having undertaken an assumption of responsibility, in the sense defined in the authorities, on the basis of answering a 999 call, attending the scene of a fire or taking steps to extinguish a fire or to save lives or property, as those actions represented them carrying out their statutory functions and public duty; (ii) general policy considerations required be taken into account; (iii) while analogies might be drawn with the provision of medical services, or the ambulance service, they were of limited assistance, (iv) there was no general duty to rescue, the fire service had been held not to be liable if they failed to attend a fire, therefore, it seemed unprincipled to suggest that a fire service which did attend a fire and sought to extinguish it could be held liable for their actions, other than in circumstances where they negligently inflicted fresh injury; and (v) the line of English authority relevant to the liability of public bodies including fire services was well established and of considerable authority and it would be unfortunate to adopt a different approach in Scotland, East Suffolk Rivers Catchment Board v Kent [1941] A.C. 74, Capital & Counties Plc , Gorringe , Mitchell v Glasgow City Council, 2009 S.C. (HL) 21 and Michael , considered , Duff , Gibson and Burnett , disapproved and Mackay , approved . (2) In the present case, S owed a duty of care to the general public, including H but that duty was to take care not to negligently inflict a fresh injury; there were neither averments that S had made matters worse or that they had inflicted a fresh injury when they had arrived at, and dealt with, the fire, nor of circumstances which could properly be categorised as an assumption of responsibility giving rise to a common law duty to exercise reasonable care, and further, it would not be fair, just or reasonable to impose a duty of care of the scope contended for by H on S, thus H's case would necessarily fail even were all their averments proved, and the case as pled was irrelevant. Observed , per Lord Drummond Young, (1) that a distinction might properly be drawn between injury to the person and damage to property, consequently, it was hoped that in an appropriate case the law might develop in such a way that, at least in clear cases where action could be taken without danger to the rescuer, the officers of a public service such as the fire service or the police were obliged to take action to rescue persons in danger; (2) that the law had moved in the direction of attaching greater significance to the more traditional categorisation of distinct and recognisable situations as guides to the existence, scope and limits of the varied duties of care which the law imposed but rules derived from existing case law ought not to be applied mechanically to new situations, instead it should be asked whether, as a matter of policy directed to the specific situation under consideration, a new analysis was required, which would result in a law of negligence that was less unified than in the past but which dealt more fairly with individual cases.
JUDGE Lady Paton; Lady Dorrian; Lord Drummond Young
COUNSEL For the reclaimers: R Dunlop QC, E Campbell. For the respondents: Balfour.





NAME (wl) Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd
CITATION Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd [2002] UKHL 22
CIT [2002] UKHL 22
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Health and Safety at Work; Asbestosis; Causation; Damages; Employers' Liability; Industrial Diseases
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Claimants sought damages for asbestos induced mesothelioma - Claimants exposed to asbestos dust working for more than one employer could not show on balance of probabilities which exposure had caused disease - Usual "but for" test of causation should exceptionally be relaxed on policy grounds to allow claimants to recover.
SUMMARY Following the decision of the Court of Appeal ([2001] EWCA Civ 1881, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 1052) in relation to a number of claims for damages in asbestos related cases, the issue before the House was whether the claimant would be able to recover damages where he had been exposed to asbestos while working for more than one employer and there were no means of determining which exposure had caused the disease. The Court of Appeal had found that such a claimant could not recover damages.
HELD allowing the appeal, that a claimant would be able to recover damages where he had been exposed to asbestos while working for more than one employer and there was no means of determining which exposure had caused the disease. The injustice that arose from the imposition of liability on an employer in such circumstances greatly outweighed the injustice of denying redress to the victim. Such a conclusion was consistent with authority, properly understood, and with principle, McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 W.L.R. 1 and Wilsher v Essex AHA [1988] A.C. 1074 applied. Proof, on a balance of probabilities, that the wrongdoing of each employer had materially increased the risk to the employee that he might contract the disease was to be taken as proof that each employer had materially contributed to it.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hutton; Lord Rodger of Earlsferry
COUNSEL For Fa: Brain Langstaff Q.C. and Andrew Hogarth. For Fo and M: Sir Sydney Kentridge Q.C., David Allan Q.C. and Matthew Phillips. For W and A: Stephen Stewart Q.C., Michael Rawlinson and Sarah Spear. For S: Nigel Wilkinson Q.C. and William Vandyck.





NAME (wl) Chester v Afshar
CITATION Chester v Afshar [2004] UKHL 41
CIT [2004] UKHL 41
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Advice; Causation; Clinical Negligence; Duty to Warn; Surgical Procedures
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY A neurosurgeon who failed to warn a patient of the small risk of injury inherent in surgery, even if properly performed, was liable to the patient when that risk eventuated, even though the risk was not increased by the failure to warn and the patient had not shown that she would never have had an operation carrying the same risk.
SUMMARY The appellant (X), a consultant neurosurgeon, appealed against a finding ([2002] EWCA Civ 724, [2003] Q.B. 356) that he was liable in damages for his failure to warn the respondent (C) of a risk inherent in surgery that he had performed on her. C suffered repeated episodes of low back pain and had been referred for surgery to X, who was experienced in disc surgery. C underwent the surgery and suffered a rare complication known as cauda equina syndrome, a risk in respect of which X had failed to warn her in advance. The judge had not found that X had been negligent in the actual performance of the surgery. However, he had found that X had failed to warn C of the small risk that the operation could adversely affect her, and that had she been warned of the risk, she would not have undergone the surgery at the time she did.
HELD dismissing the appeal (Lords Bingham and Hoffmann dissenting), that a judgment in C's favour could not be based on conventional causation principles. The "but for" test was satisfied since C would not have had the operation when she did if the warning had been given. But the risk of which she should have been warned was not created by the failure to warn. It was already there, as an inevitable risk of the operative procedure itself, however skillfully and carefully it was carried out. The risk was not increased, nor were the chances of avoiding it lessened, by what X had failed to say about it. However, the duty of a surgeon to warn of the dangers inherent in an operation was intended to help minimise the risk to the patient and was also intended to enable the patient to make an informed choice whether to undergo the treatment recommended and, if so, at whose hands and when. X had violated C's right to choose for herself, even if he had not increased the risk to her. The function of the law was to enable rights to be vindicated and to provide remedies when duties had been breached. Unless that was done, the duty to warn would be a hollow one. On policy grounds the test of causation was satisfied in the instant case. The risk was within the scope of the duty to warn so that the injury could be regarded as having been caused, in the legal sense, by the breach of that duty, Chappel v Hart [1999] Lloyd's Rep. Med. 223 and Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 considered.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Steyn; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe
COUNSEL For C: Adrian Whitfield Q.C. and Jacqueline Perry. For A: Martin Spencer Q.C. and Kristina Stern.





NAME (wl) Gregg v Scott
CITATION Gregg v Scott [2005] UKHL 2
CIT [2005] UKHL 2
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Damages; Health; Cancer; Causation; Clinical Negligence; Damages; Diagnosis; Loss of Opportunity; Lymph Vessels
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Liability for the loss of a chance of a more favourable outcome should not be introduced into clinical negligence claims.
SUMMARY The appellant (G) appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 1471, [2003] Lloyd's Rep. Med. 105) that his medical negligence claim against the defendant doctor (S) failed. G had visited S because he had a lump under his arm. S negligently misdiagnosed G's condition as benign. A year later another general practitioner referred G to hospital for an examination and it was discovered that G had cancer of a lymph gland. By that time the tumour had spread to G's chest. G suffered pain and had to undergo a course of chemotherapy. He was left with poor prospects of survival. G sued S, alleging that S should have referred him to hospital and that if S had done so his condition would have been diagnosed earlier and there would have been a high likelihood of a cure. The judge held that on the expert evidence the delay in diagnosis had reduced G's chances of surviving for more than 10 years from 42 per cent to 25 per cent. He therefore dismissed G's action because the delay had not deprived G of the prospect of a cure, meaning surviving more than 10 years, because, at the time of his misdiagnosis, G had less than a 50 per cent chance of surviving more than 10 years anyway. The Court of Appeal dismissed G's appeal. G submitted that (1) the delay in diagnosis and treatment had caused physical injury, in the shape of the spread of the cancer before his therapy began, and the losses he had suffered were consequential on that physical damage; (2) apart from any other injury, the reduction in his chances of survival was itself a compensatable head of damage.
HELD dismissing the appeal (Lord Nicholls and Lord Hope dissenting), that (1) even if the quantification of future losses was conventionally decided on the evaluation of risks and chances, G had to show that the loss was consequential on injury caused by S's negligence. Causation had to be shown on the balance of probabilities. On the judge's findings it had not been shown that on the balance of probabilities the delay in commencing G's treatment that was attributable to S's negligence had affected the course of his illness or his prospects of survival, which had never been as good as even. (2) Liability for the loss of a chance of a more favourable outcome should not be introduced into personal injury claims. (3) (Per Lord Nicholls and Lord Hope) The significant reduction in the prospects of a successful outcome for G which S's negligence caused was a loss for which G was entitled to be compensated. The fact that G was already suffering from illness at the date of S's negligence, from which G had at that date significant prospects of recovery, provided him with a cause of action for the reduction in those prospects that resulted from the negligence. What had to be valued was what G had lost, and the principle on which that loss had to be calculated was the same, irrespective of whether the prospects were better or less than 50 per cent.
JUDGE Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers; Baroness Hale of Richmond
COUNSEL For the appellant: Simeon Maskey QC, Julian Matthews. For the respondent: Philip Havers QC, William Edis, David Mankell.





NAME (wl) Bailey v Ministry of Defence
CITATION Bailey v Ministry of Defence [2008] EWCA Civ 883
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 883
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Brain Damage; Causation; Clinical Negligence
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant MOD appealed against a decision ([2007] EWHC 2913 (QB)) that it was liable in damages for brain damage suffered by the respondent (B).
ABSTRACT B had been a patient in a hospital managed by the MOD. B had undergone an unsuccessful procedure to remove a gallstone, the view of which had been obscured by considerable bleeding during the procedure. Following the procedure, there was a period of lack of care and in particular a failure to resuscitate. B was diagnosed as possibly developing pancreatitis. Her condition continued to deteriorate and she was subsequently transferred to an intensive care unit, where she underwent additional procedures, including surgery for massive bleeding to the liver. It was confirmed that she had pancreatitis. B was later moved to the renal ward of another hospital, where she aspirated her vomit, which led to cardiac arrest that caused her to suffer hypoxic brain damage. The judge held that the physical cause of B's aspiration and subsequent cardiac arrest was her weakness and inability to react to her vomit, and that the contributory causes of the weakness was the negligent post-operative care at the MOD's hospital and what flowed from that and the pancreatitis, a non-negligent cause, each of which had made a material contribution to her overall weakness.
ABSTRACT The MOD submitted that (1) the judge had been wrong to conclude that, but for the lack of post-operative care, a further procedure would have taken place, which would have saved all, or at least some, of the traumatic and life-threatening period and procedures that B had to endure following her transfer to the intensive care unit and would have avoided the considerable weakening of B; (2) if the judge rejected the evidence that it had been B's weakened condition caused by catabolism that had prevented her responding in the normal way to vomiting, he had no other evidence to link the lack of care and what flowed from it with the occurrence of the vomiting and aspiration; (3) unless B could establish that but for the negligence of the MOD the brain damage would not have happened she could not succeed, and the pancreatitis was the mostly likely cause of the vomit and could have been a cause on its own of her inability to protect her airway.
SUMMARY In the circumstances, it was enough for a patient to establish that, on the balance of probabilities, a lack of post-operative care and what flowed from that made a material contribution, namely something greater than negligible, to the overall weakness of her condition that had caused her aspiration and subsequent cardiac arrest and consequent brain damage.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) On the evidence, the judge had been entitled to conclude that if B had been properly resuscitated overnight and if correctly cared for following the procedure at the MOD's hospital she would have been subjected to a further intervention. (2) If all that was necessary, for the purpose of establishing the cause of B's weakness, was a material contribution and if, for that material contribution to be established, it was sufficient to establish a contribution that was more than negligible then the judge's conclusion could not be faulted. (3) It was enough for B to establish that, on the balance of probabilities, a lack of care made a material contribution, namely something greater than negligible, to the weakness of her condition, although that was not an application of the "but for" test. If the evidence demonstrated on a balance of probabilities that an injury would have occurred as a result of non-tortious cause or causes in any event, a claimant would have failed to establish that the tortious cause contributed, Hotson v East Berkshire HA [1987] A.C. 750 considered. If the evidence demonstrated that "but for" the contribution of the tortious cause the injury would probably not have occurred, the claimant would have discharged the burden. In a case where medical science could not establish the probability that "but for" an act of negligence the injury would not have happened but could establish that the contribution of the negligent cause was more than negligible, the "but for" test was modified, and the claimant would succeed. The instant case involved cumulative causes acting so as to create a weakness and thus the judge had applied the right test and was entitled to reach the conclusion he had reached, Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 and Bonnington Castings Ltd v Wardlaw [1956] A.C. 613 applied, McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 W.L.R. 1 considered and Wilsher v Essex AHA [1988] A.C. 1074 distinguished.
JUDGE Waller LJ; Sedley LJ; Smith LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Derek Sweeting QC. For the respondent: Christopher Gibson QC, Paul Dean.





NAME (wl) Sanderson v Hull
CITATION Sanderson v Hull [2008] EWCA Civ 1211
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 1211
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Health and Safety at Work; Breach of Duty of Care; Burden of Proof; Causation; Employers' Liability; Food Hygiene; Infections
ABSTRACT The appellants (S) appealed against an order that they were liable for an infection that the respondent (H) had contracted whilst working for them.
ABSTRACT H had been employed as a turkey plucker. She was provided with gloves and aprons but a few days later she started to work without gloves. She was subsequently diagnosed as suffering from campylobacter enteritis. She alleged that she had been infected by the bacterium during the course of her employment, and that S, in breach of their duty, had failed to protect her from the risks of infection that were inherent in handling dead poultry. Experts agreed that the only route by which the bacterium could have entered H's body was by her mouth. The recorder held that S had been negligent and had breached several statutory duties, which included a failure to warn H of the risks of exposure to the bacterium and advise her as to the precautions she should take to minimise the risk of infection. As to causation, the recorder in his draft judgment held that H had failed to prove that but for S's negligence she would probably not have contracted the infection. However, he reconsidered his holding on causation after being requested by H on the basis that it was impossible for her to satisfy the test. The recorder concluded that the exception to the "but for" test applied and that H had established the causal link between breaches of duty and injury by showing that the breaches had materially increased the risk of infection.
ABSTRACT S submitted that (1) the recorder should not have acceded to the request to reconsider the issue of causation because the issue of material contribution to risk had not been argued at the trial; (2) the case was not one where the exception to the "but for" test of causation applied, the recorder had wrongly extended the exception to another disease or condition, and it was not impossible for H to satisfy the "but for" test.
SUMMARY The instant case was not one where it was impossible for an employee to prove that but for the employer's negligence she would probably not have been infected by a bacterium whilst plucking turkeys, and the recorder was wrong to hold that the case fell within the exception to the "but for" test in Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) H's request was not an attempt to reargue the issues that had already been argued and decided; it was an admission that she had failed to raise what she later thought was a vital issue. S had a fair opportunity to put their case on the new point. The recorder should not be criticised for taking the course he had, Egan v Motor Services (Bath) Ltd [2007] EWCA Civ 1002, [2008] 1 W.L.R. 1589 and R. (on the application of Edwards) v Environment Agency (No.2) [2008] UKHL 22, [2008] 1 W.L.R. 1587 considered. (2) Great caution was required before any development of the exception to the "but for" test of causation should be allowed, Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 and Barker v Corus UK Ltd [2006] UKHL 20, [2006] 2 A.C. 572 considered. However, the conditions set out in Fairchild in relation to mesothelioma, which might justify the relaxation of the test, were not intended to exclude the application of the exception to other diseases and circumstances. An essential element for the extension of the exception was to be the impossibility for the claimant to prove enough to satisfy the "but for" test: mere difficulty of proof would not be enough, Fairchild considered. In the instant case, the recorder had not properly analysed the facts relating to negligence and causation. The recorder's difficulties in reaching a conclusion on causation were created not by any impossibility of proof but by his failure to make crucial findings of fact. If the necessary findings of fact had been made, he would have been able to make a decision on the usual "but for" basis. If he had held that, if properly warned, H would have been careful not to touch her face whilst working, he might then have been able to say that she would probably not have done so although he might have recognised that a small risk remained that she would do so. If he had accepted that, if warned, H would not have discarded the gloves, he could then have held that it was unlikely that her hands would have been infected. Finally, he would have had to recognise that there was some risk of contact from door handles and other places that could not have been reduced or avoided by any amount of warning. If findings of that kind had been made, it would have been open to the recorder to hold that, on the balance of probabilities, H would not have been infected. Therefore, the instant case was not one in which it was impossible for H to prove causation. The crucial issues were not incapable of proof, which was a necessary feature if a case was to be brought within the Fairchild exception. Accordingly, the recorder was wrong to hold that the case fell within the Fairchild exception.
JUDGE Tuckey LJ; Scott Baker LJ; Smith LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Simon Butler, Abi McHugh de Clare. For the respondent: Stephen Douglas.





NAME (wl) Wooten v J Docter
CITATION Wooten v J Docter [2008] EWCA Civ 1361
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 1361
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Causation; Contraception; Pregnancy; Risk
ABSTRACT The appellant (W) appealed against a decision that, despite the negligent error of the respondent (X), a pharmacist, in dispensing to her a wrong contraceptive pill, the error had neither caused nor materially contributed to the contraceptive failure and her pregnancy.
ABSTRACT W had obtained a repeat prescription for a contraceptive pill, Microgynon. However X dispensed another pill, Logynon. Both pills contained amounts of oestrogen and progesterone hormones. By virtue of the change from Microgynon to Logynon W took exactly the same quantity of oestrogen but took 100mcg less of progesterone. On the second night, again, she took 100mcg less of progesterone but exactly the same amount of oestrogen as she would have taken had she continued with the prescribed contraceptive Microgynon. Thereafter W returned to taking Microgynon. Despite taking Logynon, W conceived and gave birth. W claimed damages for care, expenses and loss of earnings flowing from the pregnancy and a period of post-natal psychosis. The judge accepted expert evidence that there was no biological reason to suggest that the intake of the two Logynon pills increased the risk of contraceptive failure, which was contrary to the evidence of W's expert (J). The judge also held that the reduction of 100mcg or 200mcg of progesterone did not increase, let alone materially increase, the risk of contraceptive failure. He accepted that oral contraceptive manufacturers' advice demonstrated that they believed that a change from one combined oral contraceptive to another increased the risk of a woman becoming pregnant, but pointed out that the advice did not cover W's situation. The judge held that, to the extent that there was any possible additional risk resulting from the taking of two wrong pills, that risk was far outweighed by the intrinsic contraceptive failure risk, and that J's estimate of the increased risk by a factor of 13 was unsupported.
ABSTRACT W submitted that the judge's conclusions were not justified by the evidence and that because the state of scientific knowledge precluded her from establishing that but for the erroneous dispensing of Logynon she would not have become pregnant, she could invoke the alternative and exceptional principles of causation.
SUMMARY On the evidence a judge had been entitled to hold that despite the negligent error of a pharmacist, in dispensing to a woman a wrong contraceptive pill, the error had neither caused nor materially contributed to the contraceptive failure and her pregnancy.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) There was ample evidence on which the judge could reject J's estimate of increased risk and the inferences about contraceptive cover which W suggested should be drawn from the manufacturer's and other advice. W had not switched from one oral contraceptive to another over the space of one or more cycles. She had merely reduced the level of one of the two hormones supplied, progesterone, by 100mcg or, at most, 200mcg. None of the medical studies, which were referred to, covered that situation. Added to that was the absence of any biological explanation as to why the reduction in the level of progesterone to a level, which was found to be adequate to prevent ovulation, should have caused pregnancy in the instant case. No reasons were advanced by W for substituting a different conclusion to that of the judge either to the efficacy of Microgynon over Logynon or as to the consequences of taking what was described as two wrong pills. The judge was entitled, on analysis of the material available and on the basis of the evidence of experts relied on by X, to reject J's views about the increase in risk. There was no basis for challenging the judge's findings of fact. That was sufficient to dispose of the appeal. (2) W had failed to establish that the erroneous intake of two Logynon pills materially increased the risk of contraceptive failure. She could not invoke any principle identified in Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 or Barker v Corus UK Ltd [2006] UKHL 20, [2006] 2 A.C. 572 to overcome the judge's finding that the reduction of 100mcg or 200mcg or progesterone did not increase, let alone materially increase, the risk of contraceptive failure, Fairchild and Barker considered. Whether the instant case was to be regarded as a case in which W had to satisfy the "but for" test for causation or whether the principle in Fairchild and Barker could be extended and applied to the instant case was immaterial. The judge had not found as a fact that the intake of two Logynon pills gave rise to additional risk. Whether the risk due to the reduced intake of progesterone was to be regarded as a risk distinct from the inherent risk of contraceptive failure or merely a risk which increased the inherent risk, W had failed to establish any risk, attributable to so limited a reduction of progesterone, at all.
JUDGE Waller LJ; Moses LJ; Hallett LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: David Thomson. For the respondent: Graham Southall-Edwards.





NAME (wl) Barker v Corus (UK)
CITATION Barker v Corus (UK) [2006] UKHL 20
CIT [2006] UKHL 20
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Damages; Employment; Torts; Apportionment; Asbestos; Causation; Mesothelioma; Risk; Self-Employment; Several Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Where employers were liable on the basis that they had negligently exposed an employee to asbestos and thereby created a material risk of mesothelioma which had eventuated, it would be fair that they should be severally liable only to the extent of the share of the risk created by their breach of duty.
SUMMARY The appellant employers appealed against decisions of the Court of Appeal (including [2004] EWCA Civ 545, [2005] 3 All E.R. 661) in respect of their liability for damages for negligently exposing the respondents to asbestos dust. The respondent in the first case (B) had died of asbestos related mesothelioma. During his working career he had had three material exposures to asbestos. The first two exposures were in consequence of breaches of duty by the employers, the second employer being the first appellant (C). The third exposure was while B was working as a self-employed plasterer and involved a failure by B to take reasonable care for his own safety. The judge and Court of Appeal held that C was jointly and severally liable with the first employer, but subject to a 20 per cent reduction for B's contributory negligence while he was self-employed. In the second case the respondent (P), who had died of mesothelioma, had been during his working life regularly exposed to asbestos in breach of duty by four employers, although the periods of exposure were of different lengths. In the third case the respondent (M) had been exposed to asbestos in shipyards by a number of employers. In the cases of P and M the judges and Court of Appeal followed the decision in B's case in holding that the solvent employers were jointly and severally liable for the full damage. C submitted that it should not be liable at all as a matter of causation, since there had been a period when B and no one else had been responsible for his exposure to asbestos dust; and the appellants submitted, amongst other things, that they should be severally liable only according to the share of the risk created by their breach of duty.
HELD allowing the appeals (Lord Rodger of Earlsferry dissenting on the issue of apportionment), that (1) as an exception to the usual rule of causation, a worker who had contracted mesothelioma after being wrongfully exposed to asbestos at different times by more than one employer or occupier could sue any of them notwithstanding that he could not prove which exposure had caused the disease, Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 applied. The Fairchild exception could operate even though not all the potential causes of damage were tortious, and a non-tortious source of risk did not have to have been created by someone who was also a tortfeasor, McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 W.L.R. 1 considered. However it was an essential condition for the operation of the exception that the impossibility of proving that the defendant caused the damage arose out of the existence of another potential causative agent that operated in the same way, Wilsher v Essex AHA [1988] A.C. 1074 distinguished. (2) The decision of the majority in Fairchild proceeded on the basis that the creation of a material risk of mesothelioma was sufficient for liability. If the basis of liability was the wrongful creation of a risk or chance of causing the disease, the damage that the defendant should be regarded as having caused was the creation of such a risk or chance. If that was the right way to characterise the damage, then it did not matter that the disease as such would be indivisible damage, Associated Newspapers Ltd v Dingle [1961] 2 Q.B. 162 distinguished. Treating the creation of the risk as the damage caused by the defendant involved quantifying the likelihood that the damage that was known to have materialised was caused by that particular defendant. It would then be possible to determine the share of the damage that should be attributed to him. The attribution of liability according to the relative degree of contribution to the chance of the disease being contracted would also be fair. On that approach questions of contributory negligence and contribution would not normally arise. The instant cases would be remitted to redetermine the damages by reference to the proportion of the risk attributable to the breaches of duty by the appellants.
JUDGE Lord Hoffmann; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Rodger of Earlsferry; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe; Baroness Hale of Richmond
COUNSEL For the appellants: Jeremy Stuart-Smith QC, Charles Feeny, Jayne La Grua. For the respondents Barker and Murray: David Allan QC, Peter Cowan. For the respondent Patterson: Allan Gore QC, Nigel Lewers.





NAME (wl) Sienkiewicz v Greif (combined appeals)
CITATION Sienkiewicz v Greif (combined appeals) [2011] UKSC 10
CIT [2011] UKSC 10
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Health and Safety at Work; Local Government; Personal Injury; Apportionment; Asbestos; Burden of Proof; Causation; Mesothelioma; Risk; Schools; Several Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The first appellant manufacturing company (G) and the second appellant local authority (L) appealed against decisions ([2009] EWCA Civ 1159, [2010] Q.B. 370 and [2009] EWCA Civ 1211, [2010] E.L.R. 227) concerning the appropriate rule of causation in cases of mesothelioma involving a single defendant where there was also a risk of exposure from the general atmosphere.
ABSTRACT L and G were the sole known sources of exposure of the respondents (W and S) to asbestos dust, S from her employment in a steel drum factory and W from her secondary school. In each case, the extent of the exposure had been found to be small. The Court of Appeal had applied the principle in Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32 and Barker v Corus UK Ltd [2006] UKHL 20, [2006] 2 A.C. 572 and in each case found L and G to be responsible for exposing W and S to sufficient asbestos dust to create a material increase in risk and therefore jointly and severally liable. The issues for determination were: (i) whether the rule of causation that had been developed in cases of mesothelioma left any room for applying a test of balance of probability to causation; (ii) whether the Fairchild exception applied in cases involving a single defendant and whether it was appropriate to apply a test which attributed causative effect to any factor which more than doubled a risk of a claimant developing mesothelioma; (iii) what constituted a material increase in risk.
SUMMARY The exception in Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd (t/a GH Dovener & Son) [2002] UKHL 22, [2003] 1 A.C. 32, governing attribution of causation in cases of mesothelioma following wrongful exposure to asbestos, applied in cases involving a single defendant. Accordingly, in cases of both single and multiple defendants, a claimant would succeed if he proved, on the balance of probability, that a defendant's breach of duty had materially increased the risk that he would develop the disease and there was no need for him to show that the breach had doubled the risk.
HELD Appeals dismissed.
HELD (1) The Compensation Act 2006 s.3 had grafted a special rule onto the principle in Fairchild and Barker that applied only to mesothelioma. That had draconian consequences for an employer who had been responsible for only a small proportion of the overall exposure of a claimant to asbestos dust. However, it would be wrong to have regard to those consequences because that position had been laid down by Parliament. Section 3 applied where the responsible person was liable in tort for materially increasing the risk of a victim contracting mesothelioma. Whether and in what circumstances liability in tort attached to one who had materially increased the risk of a victim contracting mesothelioma remained a question of common law which was capable of further development. The rule in Fairchild and Barker had been adopted to cater for the ignorance that had existed at the time of those decisions about the causes of mesothelioma. Section 3 therefore did not preclude the courts from reverting to the conventional approach of balance of probabilities should advances in medical science in relation to the disease make such a step appropriate (see paras 58, 70, 142 of judgment). (2) Knowledge about mesothelioma was based partly on medical science and partly on statistical analysis or epidemiology. Uncertainty about the biological cause of the disease made it impossible for a claimant to prove causation according to the conventional "but for" test and that was why the special rules of causation in Fairchild and Barker had been devised. There were special features and knowledge gaps in relation to mesothelioma which meant that it was inappropriate to decide causation on epidemiological data relating incidence to exposure. The "double the risk" test was therefore not appropriate in cases of single or multiple defendants and the adoption of the special rule of causation set out in Fairchild and Barker was justified in cases where there was one defendant. Even if it was possible to postulate with confidence that the extent of a defendant's contribution to a victim's exposure to asbestos precisely reflected the likelihood that his breach of duty had caused the victim's disease, there would still be justification for the application of the Fairchild rule where all the exposure was wrongful, Fairchild and Barker followed (paras 11, 19-20, 97-106, 113, 160-162). (3) Liability for mesothelioma fell on anyone who had materially increased the risk of the victim contracting the disease. The insertion of the word "material" was intended to exclude an increase of risk that was so insignificant that the court would properly disregard it on the de minimis principle. There was no justification for adopting the "double the risk" test as the benchmark of what constituted a material increase of risk. What was de minimis was a question for the judge on the facts of any particular case. In the case of mesothelioma, a stage had to be reached at which, even allowing for the possibility that exposure to asbestos could have a cumulative effect, a particular exposure was too insignificant to be taken into account, having regard to the overall exposure that had taken place (paras 107-108).
JUDGE Lord Phillips PSC; Lord Rodger JSC; Lady Hale JSC; Lord Brown JSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Kerr JSC; Lord Dyson JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Jeremy Stuart-Smith QC, Charles Feeny. For the first respondent: Christopher Melton QC, Richard Pearce. For the second respondent: David Allan QC, Simon Kilvington.





NAME (wl) Humber Oil v The Owners of the Ship 'The Sivand'
CITATION Humber Oil v The Owners of the Ship 'The Sivand' [1998] 2 Lloyd's Rep 97
CIT [1998] 2 Lloyd's Rep 97
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Causation; Negligence; Novus Actus Interveniens
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY causation; novus actus interveniens; additional expense arising from unforeseeable intervening event foreseeable
SUMMARY O were the owners of the ship Sivand which damages harbour installations. H engaged contractors under standard form of contract on ICE conditions which provided by cl.12 for the payment of an additional sum if the contractor came upon physical conditions which could not have been reasonably foreseen by an experienced contractor. The contractors lost a jack up barge when the sea bed under its legs collapsed. O appealed against H's claim for the additional sum on the ground that it was due by virtue of an intervening event that broke the chain of causation; which event was an unforeseen event, too remote from the admitted negligence, and was not a pre-existing state of affairs.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that H had acted in a reasonable way by employing reputable contractors, who in turn had acted competently. The collapse of the sea bed was an event both unforeseen and unforeseeable, but it did not break the chain of causation. In a tortious claim, the subsequent action of a plaintiff would not of necessity affect the responsibility of the defendant even if he was negligent, unless it affected the reasonableness of his duty to mitigate his loss, whereas the action of a third party, whether negligent or not, might intervene. Causation was restricted only by the two limbs of direct and natural consequences and reasonable foreseeability. In the instant case, it had been clearly foreseeable that the cost of repair might include extra payments made to contractors for unforeseen physical conditions, Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388, Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Miller Steamship Co Pty Ltd (The Wagon Mound) [1967] 1 A.C. 617, Oropesa, The [1943] P. 32, Metagama, The (Costs) (1928) 30 Ll. L. Rep. 132, Carslogie Steamship Co Ltd v Royal Norwegian Government (The Carslogie) [1952] A.C. 292 and Liesbosch, The [1933] A.C. 449 considered.
JUDGE Evans LJ; Hobhouse LJ; Pill LJ
COUNSEL For the plaintiffs: Mark Cran Q.C. and Neil Calver. For the defendants: Nicholas Hamblen Q.C.





NAME (wl) Lamb v Camden LBC
CITATION Lamb v Camden LBC [1981] QB 625
CIT [1981] QB 625
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Damage to Property; Remoteness; Squatting
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Remoteness of damage; intervening acts by third parties; limitation of liability
SUMMARY Where a property is damaged through actionable nuisance or negligence and thereby left unoccupied, further damage done by invading squatters is too remote to form part of the damages. The plaintiffs owned a house which had been let furnished. Due to local council work nearby a water main was broken and escaping water severely damaged the house. The tenant left and the house was left unoccupied. While the house was thus left empty squatters entered and by the time they were evicted had caused extensive damage. The defendants admitted liability in nuisance, and on the question of the squatters' damage, the official referee held that this damage was too remote. On appeal, held, dismissing the appeal, that the damage done by squatters was too remote, and that to consider whether squatting was "likely or not" was to apply the wrong test. (Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388 applied and Gissing v Cow and Gate applied).
JUDGE Lord Denning MR; Oliver LJ; Watkins LJ





NAME (wl) McKew v Holland & Hannen & Cubitts (Scotland) Ltd
CITATION McKew v Holland & Hannen & Cubitts (Scotland) Ltd [1969] 3 All ER 1621
CIT [1969] 3 All ER 1621
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Ankle; Causation; Employers' Liability; Leg; Personal Injury; Reasonableness
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Personal injuries; remoteness; supervening act causing injury
SUMMARY The appellant sustained injury during the course of his employment; for this injury the respondents, his employers, were admittedly liable. As a result of this injury the appellant occasionally but without warning lost control of his left leg, which gave way under him. Shortly after the accident the appellant, accompanied by his wife, small daughter and brother-in-law, went to inspect a first-floor flat with a view to his taking a tenancy. On leaving the flat his wife and brother-in-law secured the door but he set off down the steep stairs with his small daughter; the stairs had no handrail. Suddenly, the appellant's left leg gave way and, in order to save himself from falling, he jumped some ten steps but in landing fractured his ankle severely. He claimed that the respondents were liable for this latter accident.
HELD dismissing his appeal, (1) that the appellant's act in attempting to descend steep stairs without a handrail and without adult assistance was in the circumstances unreasonable or, alternatively (per Lord Guest), the act of jumping was unreasonable; and (2) that the chain of causation was, therefore, broken so that the respondents were not liable for the latter injury. (Decision of Court of Session [1969] C.L.Y. 916 affirmed). Per Lord Reid (Lord Hodson and Viscount Dilhorne concurring): if the chain of causation had not been broken the appellant would not have failed because he jumped unless such action (jumping) was so unreasonable that even in an emergency on the spur of the moment no reasonable man would have been so foolish as to do what he did.
JUDGE Lord Reid; Lord Hodson; Lord Guest; Viscount Dilhorne; Lord Upjohn





NAME (wl) Wieland v Cyril Lord Carpets
CITATION Wieland v Cyril Lord Carpets [2015] EWHC 2171 (Ch)
CIT [2015] EWHC 2171 (Ch)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Partnerships Other Related Subjects: Contracts; Affirmation; Breach of Contract; Limited Liability Partnerships; Members; Notice; Repudiation; Retirement
ABSTRACT The petitioner (P) sought declaratory relief under an unfair prejudice petition in relation to the first respondent limited liability partnership (the LLP).
ABSTRACT P had joined the LLP as a fund manager. The LLP's members were a wholly owned subsidiary (LIS) and the individual fund managers. The LLP was operated under an agreement which vested a committee with general management functions, with certain matters reserved to LIS. A member was to retire "following a decision of LIS (as a Reserved matter)", and the committee could place a member on garden leave during his notice period. Under a side letter P was to receive a fixed monthly income plus performance-related profits, and he could be compulsorily retired by six months' notice, not to expire before the end of a fixed two-year membership period. Ps fund performed poorly and was closed. LIS gave him a letter of termination 13 months before the end of the two-year period and placed him on garden leave; the committee took no part in the decisions. The issues were whether (i) P's membership of the LLP had been validly terminated; (ii) the termination letter had become valid six months before the end of the two-year period; (iii) a resolution by the committee had also been necessary; (iv) P had validly been put on garden leave; (v) his exclusion from the LLP breached his contractual rights under the agreement; (vi) the letter had been an immediate renunciation of the agreement; (vii) P had affirmed the agreement; (viii) the common law doctrine of repudiatory breach was excluded where there was an agreement governing the rights and duties of the members within the Limited Liability Partnerships Act 2000 s.5.
ABSTRACT The LLP argued that s.5, properly construed, had the effect that the mutual rights and duties of all limited liability partnership members had to be governed either by an agreement or, "in the absence of agreement as to any matter", by the default provisions. The LLP argued that Parliament could not have intended that following a breach of a multi-party s.5 agreement, the continuing members would be subject to the s.5 agreement, but a member who accepted the breach would become subject to the default rules.
SUMMARY A limited liability partnership agreement had required precisely six months' notice compulsorily to retire a member. A notice giving 13 months' notice and placing the member on garden leave had breached the agreement and the member had not affirmed the agreement. The doctrine of repudiatory breach did not apply where there was a multi-party agreement governing the rights and duties of members within the Limited Liability Partnerships Act 2000 s.5.
HELD Judgment accordingly.
HELD (1) There was no ambiguity in the language of the agreement and side letter; the notice period was precisely six months. Even if there had been ambiguity, commercial common sense considerations meant that it had been reasonable to stipulate a fixed period, Arnold v Britton [2015] UKSC 36, [2015] A.C. 1619 applied (see paras 136-137, 139 of judgment). (2) The provisions could not reasonably be construed as permitting service of a premature notice which by effluxion of time might mature into a valid notice (para.144). (3) Giving effect to all the words in the agreement, there was a dual condition requiring a decision by LIS to require a member to retire, then consideration by the management committee as a reserved matter. That construction accorded with business common sense (para.153). (4) Service of a valid termination notice was a condition precedent to any exercise of the power to place a member on garden leave, which was conferred on the committee not LIS (para.157). (5) P had a right and duty to play a full role in the LLP's business for at least the first 18 months of his initial term. His complete exclusion without prior warning had left him wholly unable to fulfill his role as an active member and was a breach of contract (paras 173-174, 181). (6) A reasonable person in P's position would have concluded that the LLP had decided to terminate his active involvement in its affairs with immediate effect, and was prepared to disregard the clear provisions of the agreement where they conflicted with that aim, Eminence Property Developments Ltd v Heaney [2010] EWCA Civ 1168, [2011] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 223 applied. Those matters went to the root of the contract and amounted to immediate renunciation of the agreement (para.197). (7) It would not be right to treat P as having unequivocally elected to affirm the agreement merely because he continued to accept monthly payments. He had taken no positive steps to procure their continuation, and his continued acceptance of them was broadly consistent with his contention that he remained a member of the LLP (para.216). (8) The doctrine of repudiatory breach was excluded in relation to multi-party s.5 agreements. Once a s.5 agreement had been made, it was binding until terminated by agreement, or varied in accordance with an agreed procedure. Only in such circumstances could there be "an absence of agreement as to any matter" within the meaning of s.5(1)(b) in relation to a matter previously covered by a s.5 agreement, so as to allow the matter to be governed by the default rules. Only in that way could the possibility of mutually inconsistent rules applying to the same subject matter be avoided. It would be offensive to common sense, and contrary to the parties' reasonable commercial expectations, if the doctrine permitted P to share in the LLP's capital profits when the agreement entitled him to a fixed income not capital. Accordingly, P's purported acceptance of the repudiatory breach was of no legal effect and his relationship with the LLP continued to be governed by the agreement (paras 235, 237-241, 243-244). (9) P was entitled to damages for breach of contract, but it was difficult to see how he could have suffered any substantial loss beyond the non-payment of his fixed income. There was no basis for implying a term that the fund was to be marketed and promoted (paras 244, 247).
JUDGE Henderson J
COUNSEL For the petitioner: Andrew Thompson QC, Alex Barden. For the respondents: John Machell QC, Jennifer Heywood.





NAME (wl) Spencer v Wincanton Holdings Ltd
CITATION Spencer v Wincanton Holdings Ltd [2009] EWCA Civ 1404
CIT [2009] EWCA Civ 1404
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Accidents; Amputation; Causation; Contributory Negligence; Contributory Negligence; Foreseeability; Intervening Events; Remoteness
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant employer (W) appealed against a decision that it was liable for the injuries the respondent former employee (S) had sustained in an accident he had suffered several years after an accident he had suffered at work.
ABSTRACT S had damaged his knee in a minor accident. His injury developed to the point that, three years later, his leg had to be amputated above the knee. W did not dispute its liability for the consequences of the accident, including the amputation. Eight months after the amputation, S filled his car at a petrol station without summoning help or steadying himself using sticks or his prosthesis. He tripped and fell, doing further damage which confined him to a wheelchair permanently. S had earlier issued a claim against W in respect of the first accident, and damages in that claim were assessed after S had the second accident. W resisted the increase in the size of the claim attributable to the second accident, but the judge found that it was liable for the increase, subject to a one-third reduction to reflect S's contributory negligence.
ABSTRACT W argued that the second accident had been caused by S's unreasonable conduct, meaning that, following McKew v Holland & Hannen & Cubitts (Scotland) Ltd [1969] 3 All E.R. 1621, it should not be held liable for the injuries S had suffered in the second accident.
SUMMARY An employer was liable for the injuries of a former employee who suffered an accident for which the employer was liable, had his leg amputated as a result, and then had a second accident because he only had one leg. The employee's contributory conduct towards the second accident had been below the standard of unreasonableness required to break the chain of causation following McKew v Holland & Hannen & Cubitts (Scotland) Ltd [1969] 3 All E.R. 1621.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD The formulation in McKew was problematic in that "unreasonable" covered a wide range of meanings, McKew considered. The word's purpose in the instant context was to determine the point at which the law regarded a consequence as being too remote; that could help find its correct meaning. Although remoteness had been explained in terms of foreseeability in the past, that was problematic; if anything, it was foreseeability that had to be explained in terms of remoteness, Simmons v British Steel Plc [2004] UKHL 20, 2004 S.C. (H.L.) 94 considered. The rationale of the principle that an intervening event broke the chain of causation was fairness, Corr v IBC Vehicles Ltd [2008] UKHL 13, [2008] 1 A.C. 884 applied, and the question of remoteness involved a value judgment, Kuwait Airways Corp v Iraqi Airways Co (No.6) [2002] UKHL 19, [2002] 2 A.C. 883 applied. The degree of unreasonable conduct required by the McKew test was very high, Emeh v Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster AHA [1985] Q.B. 1012 applied. However, it was unhelpful to describe the later conduct required by the test as reckless or deliberate. The judge had found that S's conduct had fallen far below McKew unreasonableness, and there was no good reason to go behind his judgment. If he had found S principally to blame, the case might have been closer to McKew . The apportionment of blame spoke clearly against a finding either that S had acted recklessly or that it was unfair to treat the chain of causation as surviving the second accident. Like the amputation, the second accident had been an unexpected but real consequence of the first accident, albeit one to which S's own misjudgement had contributed.
JUDGE Sedley LJ; Longmore LJ; Aikens LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Dominic Nolan QC. For the respondent: John McNeil, Andrew Bridgeman.





NAME (wl) Reeves v Metropolitan Police Commissioner
CITATION Reeves v Metropolitan Police Commissioner [2000] 1 AC 360
CIT [2000] 1 AC 360
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Defences; Duty of Care; Police; Prisoners; Suicide
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY professional negligence; police officers; duty of care to known suicide risk; defences of volenti non fit injuria, novus actus interveniens and contributory negligence could not be invoked; prisoner contributorily negligent
SUMMARY R, joint administratrix of L's estate, appealed against the dismissal of her claim for damages against the Commissioner following L's suicide whilst in police custody. The judge had found that the police officers present had owed a duty to L, as a known suicide risk, to take reasonable care to prevent him committing suicide whilst in custody, and that the officers had been negligent in leaving open the hatch of L's cell door, as it was reasonably foreseeable that he would take the opportunity to tie his shirt to it and thus strangle himself. The judge held that the duty of care had been breached but a causative link had not been established between the officers' negligence and L's death because the defences of volenti non fit injuria and novus actus interveniens applied and he assessed L's contributory negligence at 100 per cent. That decision was reversed on appeal ([1999] Q.B. 169, [1997] C.L.Y. 3817), where it was held that the defences could not be relied upon where the intervening act contended for was the very same act that the defendant had a duty to prevent and damages of GBP 8,690 were awarded in full. The Commissioner appealed.
HELD allowing the appeal (Lord Hobhouse dissenting on causation), that the amount of damages was reduced. A deliberate act of suicide was not a novus actus interveniens negating the causal connection between the breach of duty and the death. To hold as such would lead to the absurd result that the very act which the duty sought to prevent would be fatal to establishing a causative link. Although persons of sound mind were generally taken to be responsible for their own actions, in rare situations a duty could be owed to such persons to prevent them from self harm. That had occurred in the instant case, owing to the complete control that the police exercised over prisoners in custody and the stresses inherent in the custodial situation. The duty represented an exception to the rule that a deliberate act by a person of sound mind taking advantage of the defendant's negligent act would destroy the causative link. Furthermore, the principle of human autonomy was not destroyed by the acts of police officers in ensuring that the prisoner's environment was monitored to prevent suicide attempts. However, on the issue of causation, both the police, who had been negligent in leaving the hatch open, and L, who had responsibility for his own life, were the causes of L's death. L was held contributorily negligent and damages were reduced by 50 per cent to apportion fault equally.
JUDGE Lord Hoffmann; Lord Mackay of Clashfern; Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough
COUNSEL For the appellant: D Pannick QC, S Freeland, M Shaw, J Johnson. For the respondent: N Blake QC, T Owen.





NAME (wl) Gray v Thames Trains
CITATION Gray v Thames Trains [2009] UKHL 33
CIT [2009] UKHL 33
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Damages; Negligence; Causation; Compensatory Damages; Criminal Conduct; Ex Turpi Causa; Intervening Events; Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; Public Policy
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant train operator (T) appealed, and the respondent (G) cross-appealed against a decision ([2008] EWCA Civ 713, [2009] 2 W.L.R. 351) that a rule of law prevented G from recovering general damages, but did not prevent him from recovering special damages for loss of earnings, in consequence of his own criminal act.
ABSTRACT G had been a passenger on a train involved in the Ladbroke Grove rail crash. The train was operated by T and the accident had been caused by T's negligence. Although G sustained only minor injuries, the experience caused him to suffer post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). While he was receiving treatment and taking medication for that condition he stabbed to death a pedestrian who had stepped into the path of his car. He pleaded guilty to manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility caused by PTSD and was sentenced to be detained in hospital. In an action for negligence against T he claimed general damages for his conviction, detention and feelings of guilt and remorse, and for damage to his reputation. He claimed special damages in respect of his loss of earnings until the date of trial and continuing, and he sought an indemnity against any claims which might be brought by dependants of his victim. The trial judge decided that a rule of law based on public policy precluded a person from recovering, in consequence of his own criminal act, both general and special damages. The Court of Appeal held that it was bound by the decision in Clunis v Camden and Islington HA [1998] Q.B. 978 to find that recovery of general damages was precluded, while recovery of loss of earnings was not. The issue was whether the intervention of G's criminal act in the causal relationship between T's breaches of duty and the damage of which he complained prevented him from recovering that loss caused by the criminal act. But for the accident and the stress disorder it caused, G would not have killed and would not have suffered the consequences for which he sought compensation; on the other hand, the killing was a voluntary and deliberate act.
ABSTRACT T argued that a rule of law based on public policy, an aspect of the wider principle of ex turpi causa, prevented a person from recovering compensation for losses suffered in consequence of his own criminal act or, more narrowly, prevented a person recovering for damage that was the consequence of a sentence imposed on him for a criminal act.
SUMMARY A rule of law that was based on public policy and which was an aspect of the principle of ex turpi causa precluded a person from recovering compensation either for losses suffered in consequence of his own criminal act or for damage that was the consequence of a sentence imposed on him for a criminal act. A claimant who had committed manslaughter as a result of psychological problems caused by the negligence of a third party was therefore precluded from recovering from that third party general damages and loss of earnings flowing from his crime.
HELD Appeal allowed, cross-appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The narrow expression of the rule, that a person could not recover for damage that was the consequence of a sentence imposed on him for a criminal act was well-established, Clunis applied. The Court of Appeal had been right to hold that it was bound by Clunis to reject G's claim for damages suffered in consequence of the sentence of detention. However, it had not been right to go on to hold, despite its finding that the rule applied, that G was entitled to compensation for loss of earnings after his arrest. He had been unable to earn because he was detained after having committed manslaughter. While it was true that even if he had not committed manslaughter, his earning capacity would still have been impaired by the PTSD, liability was precluded by the decision in Jobling v Associated Dairies [1982] A.C. 794, Jobling followed. G's claim for loss of earnings after his arrest and his claim for general damages were claims for damage caused by the lawful sentence imposed upon him for manslaughter. They fell within the narrower version of the rule and were not recoverable. (2) Neither the claim for general damages for feelings of guilt and remorse consequent upon the killing nor the claim for an indemnity against any claims which might be brought by dependants of the dead pedestrian was a consequence of the sentence of the criminal court. However, the wider version of the rule, applied by the judge at first instance, covered those heads of damage. G's liability to compensate the dependants of the dead pedestrian was an immediate, inextricable consequence of his having intentionally killed him. The same was true of his feelings of guilt and remorse. The judge at first instance was therefore right and his judgment was restored. (3) (Per Lord Phillips) It was not necessarily right to make no distinction between a sentence of imprisonment and a hospital order. While a conviction for an offence punishable with imprisonment was necessary to confer jurisdiction for the imposition of a hospital order, the offence leading to that conviction might have no relevance to the decision to make the order. Where the sentencing judge made it clear that the defendant's offending behaviour played no part in the decision to impose the hospital order, it was strongly arguable that the order should be treated as being a consequence of the defendant's mental condition and not of his criminal act. In that event ex turpi causa would not apply.
JUDGE Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Rodger of Earlsferry; Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood
COUNSEL For the appellants: Christopher Purchas QC, Steven Snowden. For the respondents: Anthony Scrivener QC, Toby Riley-Smith.





NAME (wl) Corr v IBC Vehicles Ltd
CITATION Corr v IBC Vehicles Ltd [2008] UKHL 13
CIT [2008] UKHL 13
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Employment; Causation; Consent; Contributory Negligence; Depression; Duty of Care; Fatal Accident Claims; Foreseeability; Insanity; Intervening Events; Remoteness; Suicide; Volenti Non Fit Injuria
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant company (V) appealed against a decision ([2006] EWCA Civ 331, [2007] Q.B. 46) that the respondent widow (C) was entitled to recover damages under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 s.1 in respect of the financial loss attributable to the suicide of her late husband (D).
ABSTRACT D had been employed by V as a maintenance engineer. He had been struck on the head by a machine he was working on. After the accident D underwent reconstructive surgery. He remained disfigured and suffered from post traumatic stress disorder. He became depressed and his condition worsened over time. He committed suicide nearly six years after the accident. He had begun proceedings against V claiming damages for the physical and psychological injuries which he had suffered. After D's death C was substituted as claimant. V accepted that the accident involved a breach of the duty owed to D to take reasonable care to avoid causing him personal injury, including psychological injury. It was agreed that the depressive illness from which D suffered was caused by the accident and that his depressive illness drove him to take his own life. The issue dividing the parties was whether the damages claimed by C under the 1976 Act in respect of the financial loss attributable to D's suicide were too remote.
ABSTRACT V submitted that D's suicide (1) fell outside the duty of care owed to him by V; (2) was not an act which was reasonably foreseeable and therefore not one for which V should be held liable; (3) broke the chain of causation and constituted a novus actus interveniens; (4) was an unreasonable act which broke the chain of causation; (5) was the voluntary act of the deceased, and so precluded by the principle volenti non fit injuria ; (6) amounted to contributory negligence.
SUMMARY In the circumstances loss attributable to the death by suicide of her late husband was recoverable by his dependent widow under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 s.1 in an action against his former employer, and her claim was not barred by principles of causation, remoteness and foreseeability.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) V owed D a duty to avoid causing him psychological as well as physical injury. Its breach caused D injury of both kinds. While D was not, at the time of his death, insane in M'Naghten terms, nor was he fully responsible. He acted in a way which he would not have done but for the injury from which V's breach caused him to suffer. That being so, his conduct in taking his own life could not be said to fall outside the scope of the duty which V owed him. (2) Depression, possibly very severe, was a foreseeable consequence of V's breach. It was not incumbent on C to show that suicide itself was foreseeable. A tortfeasor who reasonably foresaw the occurrence of some damage need not foresee the precise form which the damage might take, Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] A.C. 837 applied. Some manifestations of severe depression could properly be held to be so unusual and unpredictable as to be outside the bounds of what was reasonably foreseeable, but suicide could not be so regarded. It was not a usual manifestation, but it was not uncommon. Further, in the circumstances suicide was reasonably foreseeable by V, considering the possible effect of such an accident on a hypothetical employee. (3) Suicide could be a novus actus if a person took his own life as a conscious decision in the absence of any disabling mental illness, Wright v Davidson (1992) 88 DLR (4th) 698 considered. However, D's suicide was not a voluntary, informed decision taken by him as an adult of sound mind making and giving effect to a personal decision about his future. It was the response of a man suffering from a severely depressive illness which impaired his capacity to make reasoned and informed judgments about his future, such illness being a consequence of V's tort. It was not unfair to hold V responsible for that consequence of its breach of duty. In order for C to be able to recover, it was not necessary to show that D was insane in M'Naghten terms. (4) Since the suicide was not a novus actus it was impossible to hold that the damages attributable to the death were rendered too remote because the deceased's conduct was unreasonable. (5) D had not consented to the accident and injury which befell him. Nor did he consent to his suicide which was the result of a psychological condition induced by V's breach of duty. (6) It was not appropriate for the court to decide the contributory negligence issue on which the courts below had made no findings. (Per Lords Scott, Mance and Neuberger) A deduction for contributory negligence could be appropriate in circumstances of deliberate suicide committed in a state of depression induced by an accident, Reeves v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2000] 1 A.C. 360 considered.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe; Lord Mance; Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury
COUNSEL For the appellant: Jeremy Cousins QC, John Brennan, Justin Kitson. For the respondent: John Foy QC, Andrew Ritchie, Robert McAllister.





NAME (wl) Hughes v Lord Advocate
CITATION Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] AC 837
CIT [1963] AC 837
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Damages Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Accidents; Foreseeability; Negligence; Road Works; Scotland
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Remoteness; foreseeable kind of danger
SUMMARY The Post Office opened a manhole in a street under its statutory powers to maintain underground telephone equipment. In the evening it was left with a tent over it and paraffin lamps round it. An eight-year-old boy went into the tent and knocked or dropped one of the lamps down the hole, causing an explosion which injured him. He sued the Lord Advocate on behalf of the Post Office for damages in negligence.
HELD that the action succeeded as the lamp was a foreseeable source of danger and the injury flowed from it, albeit in an unpredictable way Glasgow Corp v Muir [1943] A.C. 448 distinguished.
JUDGE Lord Reid; Lord Jenkins; Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest; Lord Guest; Lord Pearce





NAME (wl) Jolley v Sutton LBC
CITATION Jolley v Sutton LBC [2000] 1 WLR 1082
CIT [2000] 1 WLR 1082
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Causation; Contributory Negligence; Foreseeability; Local Authorities; Occupiers' Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY J was rendered paraplegic in an accident involving an abandoned derelict boat and SLBC were found to have been in breach of their duty as occupiers pursuant to the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 s.2(2). J appealed against the subsequent reversal of the decision contending that the Court of Appeal had wrongly concluded that the nature and circumstances of the accident were not reasonably foreseeable. The court held that it was reasonably foreseeable that play, particularly that of teenagers, would involve some mimicry of adult behaviour and there was no distinction between normal play and the boys' endeavours to repair the boat.
SUMMARY J, aged 14, was rendered paraplegic in 1990 when a boat which had been abandoned in 1987, on an area of grass outside a block of flats owned by SLBC, fell upon him as he attempted to effect repairs to the structure. The boat had previously been jacked up by J and another boy, W, aged 13. J commenced proceedings against SLBC alleging breach of the Occupiers Liability Act 1957 s.2(2) . At first instance the court gave judgment for J subject to a 25 per cent reduction for contributory negligence, the judge finding that the boat was a trap or allurement to children and the accident reasonably foreseeable. The decision was reversed on appeal to the Court of Appeal, the court holding that the accident was not reasonably foreseeable since the actions of the boys in lifting and propping up the boat were very different activities to normal children's play and that the only foreseeable risk was of injury caused by children climbing on the boat and falling through the rotten wood. J appealed.
HELD allowing the appeal, that the actions of the boys were not so far removed from normal play so as to render them unforeseeable. The judge at first instance had been perceptive in his comment that children's play could include the mimicry of adult behaviour. The Court of Appeal was justified by disturbing the judge's findings of fact on that issue, Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] A.C. 837 and Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388 considered.
JUDGE Lord Browne-Wilkinson; Lord Mackay of Clashfern; Lord Steyn; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough
COUNSEL For J: Brian Langstaff Q.C. and Paul Spencer. For the council: Michael de Navarro Q.C. and Howard Palmer Q.C.





NAME (wl) Doughty v Turner Manufacturing Co
CITATION Doughty v Turner Manufacturing Co [1964] 1 QB 518
CIT [1964] 1 QB 518
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Causes of Action; Foreseeability; Health and Safety at Work
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Damages; damage caused different from foreseeable damage
SUMMARY A was injured by an eruption caused by chemical changes in a loose compound asbestos cement cover accidentally dropped 4 or 6 inches into a cauldron of molten metal. The employers were not negligent in failing to foresee the chemical changes or the eruption which would result. They should have foreseen that there was a danger from splashing metal on a cover being dropped into the cauldron, but the eruption occurred after all danger from splashing had ceased. In an action by A against the employer for damages in negligence, held that the accident which happened was entirely different from the kind of damage which could have been foreseen, therefore the element of foreseeability of damage was absent, there was no cause of action in negligence, and the action failed. (Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388 applied; Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] A.C. 837 distinguished; Rylands v Fletcher (1868) L.R. 3 H.L. 330 considered).
JUDGE Lord Pearce; Harman LJ; Diplock LJ





NAME (wl) Smith v Leech Brain and Co Ltd
CITATION Smith v Leech Brain and Co Ltd [1962] 2 QB 405
CIT [1962] 2 QB 405
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Damages; Death; Foreseeability; Liabilities; Negligence
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Remotenes; foreseeable damage; test of liability; Fatal Accidents
SUMMARY The decision in the Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388 case has not altered the rule that a tortfeasor takes the person he injures as he finds him. The test of liability is whether the tortfeasor could reasonably foresee the type of injury suffered.Per Lord Parker, C.J.: The Wagon Mound case would be followed in England where the facts were similar.The plaintiff's husband's lip was burnt by splashing molten metal while galvanizing an article in the course of his employment. The injury was due to the negligence of the defendants, the husband's employers. The burn was the promoting agent of a cancer in tissues which already had a pre-malignant condition, which in three years killed the husband. In an action by the plaintiff against the defendants under the Fatal Accidents Acts 1846-1908, and the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934, held that as the defendants could have foreseen injury by burning they were liable in damages for the resulting death. (Smith v London & South Western Railway Co (1870-71) L.R. 6 C.P. 14 applied; Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering Co (The Wagon Mound) [1961] A.C. 388 distinguished and Polemis and Furness Withy & Co Ltd, Re [1921] 3 K.B. 560 considered).
JUDGE Lord Parker LCJ





NAME (wl) Froom v Butcher
CITATION Froom v Butcher [1976] QB 286
CIT [1976] QB 286
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Road Traffic; Accidents; Contributory Negligence; Road Safety
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Where injuries resulting from a road accident would have been prevented or lessened if a fitted seat belt had been worn, the failure to wear a seat belt amounts to contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff and damages awarded should therefore be reduced.
SUMMARY The plaintiff, who was not wearing the fitted seat belt while driving his car, received head and chest injuries and a broken finger as the result of a collision solely attributable to the negligent driving of the defendant. Except for the broken finger, the injuries would probably have been prevented by the wearing of a seat belt. The plaintiff stated in evidence that he did not like wearing the belt because of the danger of being trapped in the vehicle after the crash and because he did not drive at more than normal speed. Nield J. had held that the omission to wear the seat belt did not amount to contributory negligence upon the basis, inter alia, that to find otherwise would constitute an unjustified invasion of the freedom of choice of the motorist; if he was wrong, he would have reduced the damages by twenty per cent.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD A reduction of twenty per cent would be made. It was held that that the prudent man should guard against the possibility of negligence by others by wearing a seat belt; that the chances of injury are four times as great when a seat belt is not worn; that in determining whether contributory negligence is made out the proper question is not what or who caused the accident but what was the cause of the damage. (Decision of Nield J. [1974] C.L.Y. 2563 reversed; Pasternak v Poulton [1973] 1 W.L.R. 476 approved; Smith v Blackburn [1974] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 229 [1974] C.L.Y. 2562 disapproved, Freeborn v Thomas [1975] R.T.R. 16 disapproved and Chapman v Ward [1975] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 309 disapproved). (Per Lord Denning M.R.) Where injuries would have been altogether prevented by the wearing of a seat belt, the damages should be reduced by 25 per cent.; where injuries would have been "a good deal less severe" the reduction should be fifteen per cent.
JUDGE Lord Denning MR; Lawton LJ; Scarman LJ





NAME (wl) Owens v Brimmell
CITATION Owens v Brimmell [1977] QB 859
CIT [1977] QB 859
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Road Traffic; Contributory Negligence; Drink Driving Offences; Passengers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Contributory negligence; road accident; passenger knowing driver under influence of drink
SUMMARY A plaintiff may be guilty of contributory negligence if he travels as a passenger when he knows the driver has consumed enough alcohol to impair his ability to drive safely, or if he goes drinking with the driver knowing he will be a passenger later when the drink deprives him of his own capacity to appreciate the danger. P and D went out in D's car for a pub-crawl. They both drank a great deal. On the way home there was an accident, caused by D's negligence, and P suffered severe and permanent injury. Later D pleaded guilty to driving without due care and attention and with excess alcohol in his blood. P claimed damages. D contended that the damages should be reduced due to P's contributory negligence.
HELD P had been guilty of contributory negligence, but only to the extent of 20 per cent, Insurance Commissioner v Joyce 77 C.L.R. 39, Car & General Insurance Corp v Seymour and Maloney (1956) 2 D.L.R. (2d) 369 and Miller v Decker (1957) 9 D.L.R. (2d) 1 applied.
JUDGE Watkins J





NAME (wl) Badger v Ministry of Defence
CITATION Badger v Ministry of Defence [2005] EWHC 2941 (QB)
CIT [2005] EWHC 2941 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Damages; Asbestos; Cancer; Contributory Negligence; Damages; Reduction; Smoking
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY A wife's claim for damages, following the death of her husband through exposure to asbestos was reduced by 20 per cent, as her husband had contributed to his own death by refusing to give up smoking, which had also caused the lung cancer that killed him.
SUMMARY The defendant MOD sought a reduction in the damages to be paid to the claimant widow (B) after it had admitted liability in negligence for the death of her husband (R). R had died of lung cancer at the age of 63. He had previously been employed by the MOD as a boiler maker, during the course of which employment he was exposed to asbestos fibres, which were causative of the lung cancer that killed him. R had smoked for the majority of his life, which was also causative of his cancer. R had received numerous warnings about the damage that his continued smoking was causing to his health and the government had issued the first health warnings about smoking in the 1970s. Despite the warnings that he received he did not stop smoking. The MOD admitted primary liability for B's claim. The MOD submitted that B's claim should be reduced by 25 per cent on account of R's contributory negligence, as he had continued to smoke when he knew or should have known that in doing so he was liable to damage his health.
HELD assessing damages, that R's continued smoking constituted contributory negligence. When the first health warnings were put on cigarette packets, it was reasonably foreseeable by a reasonably prudent man that if he smoked he risked damaging his health. In addition, R had been specifically advised about the damaging effects of smoking on his health. He had been advised to stop smoking on numerous occasions. However, R could not be criticised for starting to smoke. When he began smoking the connection between smoking and serious ill health was not widely accepted. R's fault was in failing to give up smoking. There was no evidence that R was so addicted to tobacco that he could not reasonably have been expected to have stopped smoking: R could have given up smoking. R had been guilty of a fault that was partly responsible for his death. A reasonably prudent man, warned that there was a substantial risk that smoking would seriously damage his health, would stop smoking, Froom v Butcher [1976] Q.B. 286, Jones v Livox Quarries Ltd [1952] 2 Q.B. 608 and Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd [1953] A.C. 663 considered. The principle of contributory negligence was that a person had responsibility for his actions. The reduction in damages that was just and equitable had to take account of the relative blameworthiness of the parties' conduct, Boothman v British Northrop (1972) 13 K.I.R. 112 and O'Connell v Jackson [1972] 1 Q.B. 270 applied. The MOD accepted that it was guilty of breaches of statutory duty at a time when the dangers of asbestos were known. Therefore, R's contributory negligence was less than 50 per cent. The contribution to his combined risk of his continued smoking when he should have stopped was in the region of a half of his ultimate risk. The appropriate reduction in damages attributable to R's continued smoking after he should have stopped was 20 per cent and the damages recoverable by B were reduced by that amount.
JUDGE Stanley Burnton J
COUNSEL For the claimant: Christopher Goddard. For the defendant: Wendy Outhwaite.





NAME (wl) Gough v Thorne
CITATION Gough v Thorne [1966] 1 WLR 1387
CIT [1966] 1 WLR 1387
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Road Traffic; Children; Contributory Negligence; Roads
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Contributory negligence; children; highways
SUMMARY A very young child cannot be guilty of contributory negligence. An older child may, depending on the circumstances, be of such an age as to be expected to take precautions for his or her own safety, but only if blame can be attached to him or her. A lorry driver stopped, put out a hand to stop other traffic on his right, and waved P, a girl aged 13 1/2, across in front of him. D drove past the lorry on the right as P emerged without looking out and injured her. In an action by P against D for damages for negligence D pleaded contributory negligence by P.
HELD that in the circumstances it was not negligent of P to rely on the lorry driver, there was no contributory negligence and D must compensate P in full.
JUDGE Lord Denning MR; Danckwerts LJ; Salmon LJ





NAME (wl) Co-operative Group Ltd v Pritchard
CITATION Co-operative Group Ltd v Pritchard [2011] EWCA Civ 329
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 329
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Damages; Assault; Battery; Contributory Negligence; Defences; Measure of Damages
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (C) appealed against decisions that the defence of contributory negligence was not available to it in the claim of the respondent (P) for damages for assault and battery, and that the commission of those torts had caused P to suffer from agoraphobia.
ABSTRACT P had been employed by C. Having been refused a day's leave, she and her sister had visited the store where she worked and confronted the manager (W). They were abusive to W and he asked them to leave. When they refused, W took P's arms firmly and held them in front of her. A struggle ensued and P bit W. P stumbled on a step as she left the premises. P never returned to work at the store and C terminated her employment. She alleged that W's assault led to a near complete psychiatric breakdown, depression and agoraphobia and left her unable to work. P issued proceedings against C seeking damages for assault and battery, for which acts C was said to be vicariously liable. C denied that W had assaulted P but asserted, alternatively, that her own negligence or conduct had caused or contributed to the assault. P denied that contributory negligence had any legal relevance in relation to the claim for assault and battery. At trial, the parties called consultant psychiatrists who disagreed on the effect of an assault on P's psychological problems. C's expert (X) stated that even if the court accepted P's evidence on the assault in full, she would have ended up in a similar situation within one to two years with increasing periods of ill-health due to anxiety and depression. P's expert (B) considered that if the assault was proven, that would be a major factor that would have disturbed P psychologically and affected her capacity to work. The judge found that P had suffered assault and battery by W as alleged and that, although there was a degree of provocation on her part, it was not open to him to make a finding of contributory negligence against her under the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945. He rejected B's evidence and generally accepted the evidence of X but concluded that, as a result of the assault, P had suffered significant psychiatric symptoms, including agoraphobia, and that but for the assault she would have continued to work, notwithstanding her psychiatric history. The judge awarded P special damages based on her past loss of earnings from the assault up to the date of trial plus two years' worth of future loss of earnings, together with general damages and a sum for future vulnerability on the labour market. It fell to be determined (i) if a claimant sued a defendant for damages for the torts of assault and battery whether, as a matter of law, the defendant could assert that there was contributory negligence on the part of the claimant such that any damages awarded might be reduced; (ii) whether the judge had correctly understood or recollected the effect of X's evidence on the issue of P's agoraphobia, and if so, what the consequences were in terms of the damages due to her.
SUMMARY Where a claimant sued a defendant for damages for the torts of assault and battery, as a matter of law, the defendant could not assert that there was contributory negligence on the part of the claimant such that any damages awarded might be reduced under the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945.
HELD Appeal allowed in part.
HELD It was clear from s.1(1) of the Act that its purpose was not to reduce the damages which would have previously have been awarded against defendants, Standard Chartered Bank v Pakistan National Shipping Corp (No.2) [2002] UKHL 43, [2003] 1 A.C. 959 followed. C was only entitled to assert that P was contributorily negligent so that any damages to which she was entitled had to be reduced if, at common law, there was a defence of contributory negligence to a claim against a defendant for damages for the torts of assault or battery. There was no case before the Act which held that there was such a defence in the case of an intentional tort such as assault and battery. Insofar as there were cases since the Act that suggested that it could be used to reduce damages awarded for the torts of assault or battery in a case where it was found that the claimant was contributorily negligent, they were unsatisfactory and could not stand with statements of principle made in two subsequent House of Lords decisions, Lane v Holloway [1968] 1 Q.B. 379 and Murphy v Culhane [1977] Q.B. 94 considered, Reeves v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2000] 1 A.C. 360 and Standard Chartered Bank followed. As a matter of law, therefore, C could not rely on contributory negligence to defeat P's claim or to reduce the damages otherwise to be awarded to her (see paras 31, 48-49, 61-63 of judgment). (2) The judge was not entitled to reach the conclusion that he had as to the cause of P's agoraphobia. Having rejected entirely the evidence of B and generally accepted X's evidence, he had to have given a good reason to reject a particular view of X on the effect of the assault on the psychiatric condition of P, given her medical history to date. He had not done so. The judge should have accepted X's opinion and concluded that the effect of the assault was to accelerate a psychiatric state, including agoraphobia, that P would have reached in any event. The damages awarded had, accordingly, to be reduced (paras 72-74).
HELD 
JUDGE Sir Anthony May PQBD; Smith LJ; Aikens LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Anthony Reddiford. For the respondent: Adam C Chippindall.





NAME (wl) Wooldridge v Sumner
CITATION Wooldridge v Sumner [1963] 2 QB 43
CIT [1963] 2 QB 43
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Hospitality and Leisure; Sport; Competitions; Horses; Mistake; Negligence; Spectators
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Games; horse show
SUMMARY The duty of care which a competitor or participant in a sport or game owes to a spectator depends on the standard of conduct which the sport or game permits or involves, and a spectator takes the risk of damage done to him by participants in the course of and for the purposes of that sport or game, notwithstanding that such damage may be the result of an error of judgment by the competitor, provided it is not reckless or deliberate. The plaintiff, a photographer, was injured at a horse show by S.'s horse, which was ridden in a competition by S.'s employee H., who was a skilled and experienced horseman. The plaintiff sued S. and H. The judge found that the accident was caused by the negligence of H. and awarded the plaintiff damages. On appeal, held (1) that H.'s conduct, though involving an error of judgment, did not, in the circumstances of the competition, amount to negligence; and (2) that in any event H.'s conduct did not cause the accident. Per curiam: the maxim "volenti non fit injuria" does not normally apply to cases of spectators suing participants in games, because the maxim cannot apply in the absence of negligence. Hall v Brooklands Auto Racing Club [1933] 1 K.B. 205, Bolton v Stone [1951] A.C. 850 and Murray v Harringay Arena [1951] 2 K.B. 529 applied; O'Dowd v Fraser-Nash [1951] W.N. 173, Cleghorn v Oldham (1927) 43 T.L.R. 465, Bourhill v Young [1943] A.C. 92, Kelly v Farrans [1954] N.I. 41, Letang v Ottawa Electric Railway Co [1926] A.C. 725 and Baker v TE Hopkins & Son Ltd [1959] 1 W.L.R. 966 considered.
JUDGE Sellers LJ; Danckwerts LJ; Diplock LJ





NAME (wl) ICI v Shatwell
CITATION ICI v Shatwell [2016] UKSC 8
CIT [2016] UKSC 8
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Criminal Law; Accessories; Joint Enterprise; Murder
ABSTRACT In conjoined appeals against decisions ([2013] EWCA Crim 1433) upholding convictions for murder, the Supreme Court was asked to review the doctrine of parasitic accessory liability, which had been laid down by the Privy Council in Chan Wing Siu v R. [1985] A.C. 168.
ABSTRACT In Chan Wing Siu , it was held that if two people set out to commit an offence and in the course of that joint enterprise one of them (D1) committed another offence (crime B), the second person would be guilty as an accessory to crime B if he had foreseen the possibility that D1 might act as he did.
SUMMARY The doctrine of parasitic accessory liability, laid down by the Privy Council in Chan Wing Siu v R. [1985] A.C. 168, could not be supported. The Supreme Court re-stated the principles concerning the liability of accessories or secondary parties.
HELD Appeals allowed.
HELD The Chan Wing Siu principle could not be supported. The introduction of the principle was based on an incomplete, and in some respects erroneous, reading of the previous case law, coupled with generalised and questionable policy arguments. Reversing a statement of principle which had been made and followed by the Privy Council and the House of Lords on a number of occasions was a big step, but it was right to do so for several reasons. First, the court had had the benefit of a much fuller analysis than on previous occasions when the topic was considered. Second, it could not be said that the law was now well established and working satisfactorily; it remained highly controversial and a continuing source of difficulty for trial judges. Third, secondary liability was an important part of the common law, and if a wrong turn had been taken, it should be corrected. Fourth, in the common law foresight of what might happen was ordinarily no more than evidence from which a jury could infer the presence of a requisite intention. It might be strong evidence, but its adoption as a test for the mental element for murder in the case of a secondary party was a serious and anomalous departure from the basic rule, which resulted in an over-extension of the law of murder and a reduction of the law of manslaughter. Murder already had a relatively low mens rea threshold, as it included an intention to cause serious injury, without intent to kill or to cause risk to life. The Chan Wing Siu principle extended liability for murder to a secondary party on the basis of a still lesser degree of culpability, namely foresight only of the possibility that the principal might commit murder but without there being any need for an intention to assist him to do so. Fifth, the rule had the striking anomaly of requiring a lower mental threshold for guilt in the case of the accessory than in the case of the principal, Chan Wing Siu disapproved. It would not be satisfactory for the court simply to disapprove the Chan Wing Siu principle. Those concerned with criminal justice, including members of the public, were entitled to expect a clear statement of the relevant principles. The proper course was to re-state the principles which had been established over many years before the law took a wrong turn. The error was to equate foresight with intent to assist, as a matter of law; the correct approach was to treat foresight as evidence of intent. The long-standing practice, before Chan Wing Siu , of inferring intent to assist from a common criminal purpose which included the further crime, if the occasion for it were to arise, was always a legitimate one; what was illegitimate was to treat foresight as an inevitable yardstick of common purpose. The court proceeded to re-state the relevant principles. It also addressed the potential impact of the instant decision on past convictions (see paras 79-84, 87-100 of judgment).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Hughes JSC; Lord Toulson JSC; Lord Thomas LCJ
COUNSEL For the appellant Jogee: Felicity Gerry QC, Catarina Sjolin, Adam Wagner, Diarmuid Laffan. For the appellant Ruddock: Julian Knowles QC, James Mehigan. For the Crown in Jogee: John McGuinness QC, Duncan Atkinson. For the Crown in Ruddock: Howard Stevens QC, Rowan Pennington-Benton. For the intervener (Just for Kids Law): Francis Fitzgibbon QC, Caoilfhionn Gallagher, Joanne Cecil, Daniella Waddoup. For the intervener (Joint Enterprise Not Guilty by Association): Timothy Moloney QC, Jude Bunting.





NAME (wl) Morris v Murray
CITATION Morris v Murray [1991] 2 QB 6
CIT [1991] 2 QB 6
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Damages; Aircraft; Intoxication; Personal Injury; Volenti Non Fit Injuria
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Volenti non fit injuria; passenger in light aircraft piloted by drunken pilot; whether entitled to damages
SUMMARY A passenger who knowingly and willingly embarks on a flight with a drunken pilot is barred from obtaining damages by the defence of volenti. P had been drinking for some hours with the deceased when they decided to go for a ride in the deceased's light aircraft. P assisted in preparing the aircraft, which took off, piloted by the deceased in conditions in which flying at the aerodrome had been suspended. The plane crashed, and P brought an action for negligence against the deceased's estate. The judge awarded him GBP 130,000 damages.
HELD allowing the appeal, that his claim was barred by the defence of volenti non fit injuria. P must have realised how drunk the pilot was and thereby implicitly waived his right to damages (dictum in Dann v Hamilton [1939] 1 K.B. 509 applied).
JUDGE Fox LJ; Stocker LJ; Sir George Waller





NAME (wl) Revill v Newbery
CITATION Revill v Newbery [1996] QB 567
CIT [1996] QB 567
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Liabilities; Personal Injury; Public Interest; Self-Defence; Trespass to Land
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Ex turpi causa; excessive violence; trespasser shot; whether damages available; whether doctrine of ex turpi causa non oritur actio applicable
SUMMARY N appealed against an award of damages in a personal injury action brought by R, who was shot at close range by N when trespassing on N's allotment. N, who had been asleep in his shed when he was woken by R trying to break in, had poked his shotgun through a hole in the shed door and fired. The judge awarded damages on the basis that N had used violence in excess of the reasonable limits allowed by lawful self defence and was negligent by reference to the standard of care to be expected of a reasonable man who found himself in such a situation. N challenged the finding that he was negligent and also contended that he had a complete defence under the rule that no cause of action might be founded on an illegal or immoral act.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that the finding of negligence was justified on the facts. As regards the doctrine of ex turpi causa non oritur actio, there was a public interest which required that someone engaging in illegal conduct should not benefit from his crime, but different considerations applied in cases arising in tort than in cases arising in a property or contract context, Tinsley v Milligan [1994] 1 A.C. 340 considered. Old common law authorities and the Law Commission report Liability for Damage or Injury to Trespassers (Cmnd 6428) acknowledged the existence of some duty towards trespassers and N could not rely on the doctrine to relieve him of liability.
JUDGE Neill LJ; Evans LJ; Millett LJ
COUNSEL For R: Peter Weitzman Q.C. and Jeremy H C Lea. For N: Brian R Escott Cox Q.C. and David Farrell.





NAME (wl) Vellino v Chief Constable of Greater Manchester
CITATION Vellino v Chief Constable of Greater Manchester [2001] EWCA Civ 1249
CIT [2001] EWCA Civ 1249
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Arrest; Custody; Duty of Care; Escape; Foreseeability; Personal Injury; Police Officers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY A police officer carrying out an arrest did not owe the person being arrested a duty of care to prevent him from injuring himself in a foreseeable attempt to escape from custody.
SUMMARY V, who had sustained serious injuries while attempting to escape from police custody, appealed against a decision that the police did not owe a duty of care to an arrested person to ensure that he did not injure himself in a foreseeable attempt to escape from custody. V had a history of being arrested at his flat and of seeking to evade arrest by jumping from the windows of the flat. He maintained that two police officers who had attended at his flat to arrest him had taken no action to prevent him from jumping from a window. The judge, whilst finding that it had been foreseeable that in jumping V would be likely to sustain injury and that if a duty existed the police officers had been in breach thereof, concluded that escaping from custody was a sufficiently serious criminal offence to attract the principle of ex turpi causa non oritur actio and in such circumstances no duty existed.
HELD dismissing the appeal (Sedley, L.J. dissenting), that a police officer carrying out an arrest did not owe the person being arrested a duty of care to prevent him from injuring himself in a foreseeable attempt to escape from custody. It followed that in the circumstances of the instant case the two officers had not owed V a duty to prevent him from heading towards the window in an attempt to escape, Sacco v Chief Constable of South Wales (Unreported, May 15, 1998) applied. The act of escaping from custody was a criminal offence at common law but did not give rise to any liability in tort, National Coal Board v England [1954] A.C. 403 considered. Moreover, the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945 did not apply in circumstances where a claimant's action constituted a common law crime which did not give rise to tortious liability. V's criminal conduct had been sufficiently serious to merit the application of the principle of ex turpi causa. In the opinion of Sedley, L.J., a duty was owed by police officers not to afford the temptation or opportunity for a person in custody to escape where there was a known risk that he would do himself serious harm in so doing.
JUDGE Schiemann LJ; Sedley LJ; Sir Murray Stuart-Smith
COUNSEL For V: David Stockdale Q.C. and Hugh Davies. For the Chief Constable: Andrew Edis Q.C. and David Mercer.





NAME (wl) Pitts v Hunt
CITATION Pitts v Hunt [1991] 1 QB 24
CIT [1991] 1 QB 24
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Driving When Unfit; Ex Turpi Causa; Locus Standi; Personal Injury
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Contributory negligence; participant in criminal offence; pillion passenger knowingly riding with uninsured, unlicensed, intoxicated motorcyclist; whether recovery possible
SUMMARY A pillion passenger who is injured in a collision where he has encouraged the rider to ride while intoxicated, uninsured and unlicensed cannot sue in respect of his injuries. The action arises ex turpi causa. P was a pillion passenger on a motorcyle which was involved in a collision with a car driven by J. The rider, H, was killed and P was injured. Both P and the rider had been drinking prior to the accident. P knew that the rider had no licence and was uninsured, and P had encouraged him to drive in a reckless manner. P sued J and H's personal representatives for damages for his injuries.
HELD that the action arose directly ex turpi causa and P was precluded from recovering. In the circumstances, the Road Traffic Act 1972 s.148(3) did not preclude reliance on a defence of illegality (Smith v Jenkins (1970) 44 A.L.J.R. 78, Harrison v Jackson 138 C.L.R. 438, Ashton v Turner [1981] Q.B. 137 and Saunders v Edwards [1987] 1 W.L.R. 1116 considered; Winnik v Dick 1984 S.C. 48 applied).
JUDGE Dillon LJ; Balcombe LJ; Beldam LJ





NAME (wl) Moore Stephens v Stone Rolls Ltd
CITATION Moore Stephens v Stone Rolls Ltd [2009] UKHL 39
CIT [2009] UKHL 39
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Company Law; Accountancy; Auditors; Corporate Insolvency; Duty of Care; Ex Turpi Causa; Fraud; Knowledge; Professional Negligence
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant company (R) appealed against a decision ([2008] EWCA Civ 644, [2008] 3 W.L.R. 1146) upholding the striking out of its claim in contract and tort against the respondent auditors (M).
ABSTRACT R's beneficial owner and sole directing mind and will, S, had used R as a vehicle for defrauding banks. When the fraud was discovered, the principal victim successfully sued R for deceit and was awarded substantial damages. Neither R nor S could satisfy the judgment and R went into liquidation. Its liquidators brought an action in negligence against M, seeking to recover losses caused to R in consequence of the extension of the period of its fraudulent activity caused by M's breach of duty. M accepted, for the purposes of the instant proceedings, that they were in breach of their duty to exercise reasonable care and skill in carrying out their responsibilities as auditors and that but for their breach the fraud perpetrated by S would have been discovered earlier.
ABSTRACT M submitted, however, that the action could not succeed because it was founded on R's fraud and was met by the defence of ex turpi causa. R argued that its liability for S's frauds was vicarious; that by reason of the principle in Hampshire Land Co (No.2), Re [1896] 2 Ch. 743, S's fraud could not be attributed to it; and that ex turpi causa did not provide a defence where the claimant's illegal conduct was the very thing that the defendant was under a duty to prevent.
SUMMARY Where a "one-man company" had deliberately engaged in serious fraud, the principle of ex turpi causa prevented it from claiming that its auditors were in breach of their duty of care in failing to detect that fraud.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (Lords Scott and Mance dissenting) (1) R was primarily rather than vicariously liable for the frauds. There was no doubt that S was the persona of R and it was common ground that he was the directing mind and will of the corporation. (2) The "sole actor" exception applied so as to disapply the Hampshire Land principle, Hampshire Land considered. S's fraudulent conduct was to be treated as the conduct of R, and the principle of ex turpi causa defeated R's claim. In the case of a "one-man company" that had deliberately engaged in serious fraud, awareness of that fraud was to be imputed to the company, Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v Tan [1995] 2 A.C. 378 considered. In particular, the "sole actor" principle was to be applied to a claim made by a company in liquidation against its former auditors where the company was a one-man company engaged in fraud and where the auditors were accused of negligence in failing to call a halt to that fraud. R's submission that a claim against auditors was a context in which it should not be treated as primarily liable for its fraud could not be accepted. On the assumption that M did owe a duty of care to R, it was a duty to the company as a whole and not to individual shareholders or creditors. If the only human embodiment of the company already knew about its fraudulent activities there was realistically no protection that its auditors could give it. Moreover, if the company was primarily liable because of the sole actor rule there was no innocent participator within the company who did not share the guilty knowledge. Therefore, one or more individuals who for fraudulent purposes ran a one-man company could not obtain an advantage by claiming that the company was not a fraudster but a secondary victim. (3) In arguing that ex turpi causa did not provide a defence where the claimant's illegal conduct was the very thing that the defendant was under a duty to prevent, R was relying on a principle of causation. A principle of causation could not trump ex turpi causa where that latter principle applied, however short of merits the defendant might be. (4) R had also argued that the public policy defence ought not to bar claims brought by a company in insolvent liquidation where the creditors were innocent parties who had been defrauded by S. If that were right it would create a large gap in the public policy defence. Moreover, had S carried out his frauds directly, neither he nor his trustee in bankruptcy could have resisted the public policy defence. There was no good reason to apply a different rule to a company in liquidation. Apart from special statutory claims in respect of misfeasance, wrong trading and so on, it could not assert any cause of action which it could not have asserted before the commencement of its liquidation, and that was especially true in the context of the duties of an auditor, which were not owed to a company's creditors. (5) (Per Lord Phillips) The essential issue was whether, in applying ex turpi causa to the instant case, one should look behind the company at those whose interests the relevant duty was intended to protect. Those for whose benefit the claim was brought fell outside the scope of any duty owed by M. The sole person for whose benefit such duty was owed was S, who was responsible for the fraud. In those circumstances ex turpi causa provided a defence to the claim. (6) The reasoning of the majority had the effect of relieving from all responsibility auditors who had negligently failed in their duty to check and report on the activities of one-man companies operating Ponzi schemes. That was questionable policy and it was not required by the law.
JUDGE Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe; Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood; Lord Mance
COUNSEL For the appellant: Michael Brindle QC, Mark Simpson QC, David Murray. For the respondent: Jonathan Sumption QC, Tom Adam QC.





NAME (wl) Delaney v Pickett
CITATION Delaney v Pickett [2011] EWCA Civ 1532
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 1532
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Insurance; Road Traffic; Ex Turpi Causa; Motor Insurers' Bureau; Possession with Intent to Supply; Road Traffic Accidents
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant car passenger (D) appealed against a decision to dismiss his claim for damages against the first respondent driver (P) and the second respondent insurer (T).
ABSTRACT D had been a passenger in P's car when there was a serious accident caused by P's negligence. When being rescued from the car, P was found to have sufficient cannabis to make 170 cigarettes stuffed down his sock, while D had a package sufficient to make 1,200 cannabis cigarettes under his jacket. D was seriously injured and brought proceedings. The judge rejected D's case that P had taken him out for a drive in his new car, instead finding that D and P were in possession of the cannabis with intent to supply it. He accordingly held that D's claim had arisen ex turpi causa and therefore failed. T was P's insurer but had avoided his policy. It accepted its liability to meet D's claim against P, but successfully argued that liability was excluded under the Motor Insurers' Bureau Agreement cl.6(1)(e)(iii) on the basis that D had known that the vehicle was being used in the course or furtherance of a crime.
SUMMARY A car passenger could not claim under the Motor Insurers' Bureau Agreement after he had been injured while in possession of cannabis with intent to supply, as the vehicle was being used in the course or furtherance of a crime within cl.6(1)(e)(iii) of the Agreement. Further, "crime" in that clause could not be read as being restricted to "serious crime"; that would leave the clause with little practical purpose.
HELD Appeal allowed in part.
HELD (Ward L.J. dissenting as to the judge's factual findings and on the MIB Agreement issue) (1) On the facts, the judge had been correct to find on the balance of probabilities that the transportation of illegal drugs had been the purpose of the journey. He had therefore proceeded on a correct factual basis when considering ex turpi causa and the MIB Agreement issue (see paras 62-63, 72 of judgment). (2) The judge had been wrong to uphold the ex turpi causa defence. The damage suffered by D had not been caused by his, or his and P's, criminal activity. It had been caused by P's tortious act in the negligent way in which he drove his car. In those circumstances the illegal acts were incidental and D was entitled to recover his loss from P, Gray v Thames Trains Ltd [2009] UKHL 33, [2009] 1 A.C. 1339 and Pitts v Hunt [1991] 1 Q.B. 24 followed (paras 37, 64, 73). (3) Although the MIB Agreement was intended to give effect to Directive 2009/103, the Directive gave only limited assistance in the interpretation of cl.6(1)(e) as it contained nothing corresponding to the clause. The most that could be derived was that a restrictive interpretation of the clause was required by the fact that it was an exclusion from the general principle of compensation set out in the Directive. It was obvious on the facts that the vehicle was being used in the furtherance and in the course of a crime within the meaning of the clause. "Crime" could not be read as being restricted to "serious crime"; that would leave the clause with little practical purpose. In any event, possession of a commercial quantity of cannabis with intent to supply was a serious crime to which the clause applied; given the finding that the very purpose of the journey had been the transportation of the drugs, the situation fell squarely within the wording of the clause. Use of the vehicle did not have to constitute an ingredient of the offence for the exclusion to apply; in any event, the vehicle had been an essential element in the crime, as D and P would not have wanted to carry so large a packet of drugs on public transport (paras 67-68, 77). (4) (Per Ward L.J.) The MIB Agreement had to be construed restrictively as it was an exception to the purpose of the Directive. Clause 6(1)(e)(iii) could not mean that compensation was excluded if the vehicle was being used for any crime, as that could be disproportionate; "crime" had to mean serious crime. The crime in the instant case had not been heinous enough to be the kind of crime covered by the clause (paras 48-51).
JUDGE Ward LJ; Richards LJ; Tomlinson LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Graham Wood QC. For the respondents: William Featherby QC.





NAME (wl) Joyce v O'Brien
CITATION Joyce v O'Brien [2013] EWCA Civ 546
CIT [2013] EWCA Civ 546
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Torts; Criminal Law; Causation; Criminal Conduct; Duty of Care; Ex Turpi Causa; Joint Enterprise; Public Policy; Road Traffic Accidents
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (J) appealed against a decision ([2012] EWHC 1324 (QB), [2012] Lloyd's Rep. I.R. 553) dismissing his claim for damages for personal injury against the first respondent (O) and the second respondent insurance company (T).
ABSTRACT 
ABSTRACT J had been seriously injured when he fell from the rear footplate of a van driven by O. O had pleaded guilty to dangerous driving and J claimed damages for personal injury on the basis of O's negligence. T asserted that O and J had been making their escape after stealing a set of ladders and that O, and therefore T, was not liable as they had been engaged in a criminal joint enterprise. The judge was satisfied that O and J had been involved in a joint enterprise theft and held that the public policy reflected in the principle of ex turpi causa was applicable. The issue was the ambit of the principle in the context of one criminal being injured by the negligence of another criminal when engaged in a joint criminal enterprise.
SUMMARY The principle of ex turpi causa was applicable where the character of a joint criminal enterprise was such that it was foreseeable that a party to the enterprise could be subject to unusual or increased risks of harm as a consequence of the pursuit of those criminal activities, as any resulting injury could properly be said to be caused by the claimant's criminal act even if it resulted from the negligent or intentional act of another party to the illegal enterprise.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD 
HELD (1) The wider principle was that a person could not recover compensation where his cause of action was based on his own criminal or immoral act. The test for determining liability had focused on causation, whereas the principle developed in joint enterprise cases had focused on the existence of a duty of care. However, the same causation principle should apply whether the criminal was acting alone or as part of a joint enterprise, Delaney v Pickett [2011] EWCA Civ 1532, [2012] 1 W.L.R. 2149 applied. When applying the causation principle developed in Gray v Thames Trains Ltd [2009] UKHL 33, [2009] 1 A.C. 1339, the courts should recognise the wider public policy considerations which had led them to deny joint liability in joint enterprise cases. The earlier authorities on joint enterprise provided valuable assistance in answering the question as to when the claimant's injury would be treated as having been caused by his own conduct, notwithstanding that the immediate cause was the act of a partner in crime. They reflected what seemed to be the underlying policy, even if the rationale for denying liability had to be cast in terms of causation rather than duty. The injury would be caused by, rather than occasioned by, the criminal activity of the claimant where the joint criminal illegality affected the standard of care the claimant was reasonably entitled to expect from his partner in crime, Ashton v Turner [1981] Q.B. 137 and Pitts v Hunt [1991] 1 Q.B. 24 applied. The principle was to be formulated as: where the character of the joint criminal enterprise was such that it was foreseeable that a party or parties could be subject to unusual or increased risks of harm as a consequence of the activities of the parties in pursuance of their criminal activities, and the risk materialised, the injury could properly be said to be caused by the criminal act of the claimant even if it resulted from the negligent or intentional act of another party to the illegal enterprise, Gray applied. That did not necessarily exhaust situations where the ex turpi causa principle would apply in joint enterprise cases, but would cater for the overwhelming majority of cases (see paras 21-29 of judgment). (2) In the instant case, the judge had been entitled to conclude that although the damage might not have occurred but for O's negligent driving, it was caused by the criminal activity in which J was engaged. The injury resulted from his personal conduct in placing himself in such a dangerous position, and because he had accepted the heightened risk of O's dangerous driving and that risk had materialised, Gray applied. Active encouragement would not be necessary in all cases; it would be enough that the claimant and negligent driver were involved in the criminal enterprise together, and that the accident had arisen from activity which it could be foreseen might be committed in the course of that enterprise. Active encouragement could constitute the evidence of joint enterprise which would otherwise be lacking, but in the instant case the evidence of joint enterprise and of the implicit encouragement to bad driving was plain even in the absence of active encouragement (paras 46-48). (3) As the doctrine was one of public policy, there should be some flexibility in its operation. It would not apply, for example, to minor traffic offences. In most joint criminal liability cases, the nature and characteristics of the principal offence would in practice determine which acts of a co-conspirator would attract the application of the doctrine, and for relatively trivial offences the range of such acts was likely to be very limited. Nonetheless, there could be a problem in determining in certain cases whether the offences attracted the application of the doctrine. However, wherever the precise line was to be drawn, the theft of the ladders in the instant case clearly fell on the side where the doctrine applied. Theft was not merely an imprisonable offence, it carried a maximum sentence of seven years. It was also not a strict liability offence which could be committed without any real moral culpability (paras 49-52).
JUDGE Elias LJ; Rafferty LJ; Ryder LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Christopher Melton QC, Richard Baker. For the first respondent: No appearance or representation. For the second respondent: Richard Lynagh QC, Suzanne Chalmers.





NAME (wl) Hinz v Berry
CITATION Hinz v Berry [1970] 2 QB 40
CIT [1970] 2 QB 40
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Damages; Measure of Damages; Personal Injury; Psychiatric Harm
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Personal injuries; nervous shock
SUMMARY Damages are recoverable for a recognisable psychiatric illness caused by the shock of witnessing an accident resulting from a breach of duty. The plaintiff and her husband with their four children and four foster children stopped in a lay-by whilst on a country outing. The plaintiff and one child left the others in order to pick bluebells. The defendant's car driven by him but out of control crashed into the others, killing the husband and injuring most of the children. Hearing the sound of the crash, the plaintiff turned round and saw the scene of disaster. She sued the defendant and recovered GBP 15,000 by reason of the loss of her husband and GBP 4,000 for nervous shock. The evidence showed that having been previously a woman of considerable fortitude and robustness of character she was now suffering from morbid depression as a result of the accident. On appeal by the defendant as to the quantum of damages for nervous shock, held, dismissing the appeal, that in the exceptional circumstances of the case it could not be said that the judge's award was wholly erroneous. Per curiam: No damages can properly be awarded for grief or sorrow caused by a person's death neither can they properly be awarded to a spouse for the worry about her children following her other spouse's death nor for the financial strain and stress nor the difficulties of adjusting to a new life.
JUDGE Lord Denning MR; Lord Pearson; Sir Gordon Willmer





NAME (wl) White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
CITATION White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1999] 2 AC 455
CIT [1999] 2 AC 455
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Damages; Disasters; Police Officers; Psychiatric Harm
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY psychiatric harm; police officers involved in aftermath of Hillsborough disaster; no entitlement to damages for pure psychiatric injury
SUMMARY The Chief Constable appealed against a ruling ([1998] Q.B. 255, [1996] C.L.Y. 4533) allowing the appeal of four police officers, P, against the dismissal of their action against the Chief Constable and others for damages for negligence and/or breach of statutory duty. P had all suffered post traumatic stress disorder as a result of their involvement in the aftermath of the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster in which many spectators had been killed and injured. The Chief Constable admitted that the disaster had been caused by police negligence in allowing overcrowding to occur, but disputed P's entitlement to recover damages in tort for the psychiatric injury they had suffered. P contended that justice demanded that they be compensated for the harm they had suffered as a result of a tort and that there was no justification for treating physical and psychiatric injury as different kinds of damage. P further argued that they were entitled to recover damages either on the basis of an employer's duty to protect employees from harm through work or by virtue of their status as rescuers.
HELD allowing the appeal, (Lord Goff dissenting and Lord Griffiths dissenting in part) that a chief constable owed officers under him a duty analogous to that of an employer to care for the safety of employees and to take reasonable steps to protect them from physical harm, but there was no extension of that duty to protect from psychiatric injury where there was no breach of the duty to protect from physical injury. As a result, the employment relationship did not create a liability on the Chief Constable for psychiatric injury sustained by P who had not been involved in the disaster as rescuers and it was not possible to classify P as primary victims, since none of them were at any time exposed to personal danger nor reasonably believed themselves to be so, Page v Smith [1996] A.C. 155 considered. Recognition of P's claims would significantly widen the established categories of cases for which damages could be recovered for pure psychiatric harm and to allow the claims would not fit easily with the decision in Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 A.C. 310 to deny compensation to bereaved relatives of victims of the disaster who had not witnessed events at first hand or acted as rescuers. The fact that P's injuries were sustained in the course of discharging their duties as police officers did not of itself justify extending the law so as to allow their claims.
JUDGE Lord Browne-Wilkinson; Lord Griffiths; Lord Goff of Chieveley; Lord Steyn; Lord Hoffmann
COUNSEL For the Chief Constable: Andrew Collender Q.C. and Patrick Limb. For the plaintiffs: Benet Hytner Q.C. and Graham Platts.





NAME (wl) Dulieu v White
CITATION Dulieu v White [2015] UKSC 32
CIT [2015] UKSC 32
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Books; Freedom of Expression; Intentional Torts; Interim Injunctions; Publication
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (R) appealed against a decision of the Court of Appeal ([2014] EWCA Civ 1277, [2015] E.M.L.R. 4) to grant an interim injunction restraining him from publishing certain information in a semi-autobiographical book.
ABSTRACT R, a talented performing artist, had been subject to sexual abuse at school, leading to episodes of severe mental illness. He wished to speak out about his experiences and to describe them in the book. The respondent (O) was his young son. O suffered from significant disabilities, including Asperger's syndrome. A psychologist had commented that the book would be likely to cause him enduring psychological harm. R's case was that although the book was dedicated to O, he would not expect him to see it until he was much older. The Court of Appeal held that O had sufficiently favourable prospects of establishing at trial his claim under Wilkinson v Downton [1897] 2 Q.B. 57 that the book's publication would constitute intentional conduct causing him psychiatric harm to justify an injunction restraining publication of parts of the book pending trial.
SUMMARY The Supreme Court ruled on the nature and limits of liability under Wilkinson v Downton [1897] 2 Q.B. 57 in a case where the principle in that case was relied on to prevent psychological harm being caused to a child by the publication of a semi-autobiographical book containing graphic details of his father's troubled life. There was no arguable case that publication of the book would constitute the requisite conduct element of the tort or that the father had the requisite mental element.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD In Wilkinson v Downton , Wright J. recognised that wilful infringement of the right to personal safety was a tort. It had three elements: a conduct element, a mental element and a consequence element. The issues in this case related to the first and second elements. The conduct element required words or conduct directed towards the claimant for which there was no justification or reasonable excuse. The Court of Appeal treated the publication of the book as conduct directed towards O and considered that the question of justification had therefore to be judged vis-a-vis him. That was wrong. The book was for a wide audience and the question of justification had to be considered accordingly, not in relation to O in isolation. There was every justification for the publication. A person who had suffered in the way that R had, and had struggled to cope with the consequences of his suffering in the way that he had, had the right to tell the world about it. And there was a corresponding public interest in others being able to listen to his life story in all its searing detail. Of course vulnerable children had to be protected as far as reasonably practicable from exposure to material which would harm them, but the right way of doing so was not to expand Wilkinson v Downton to ban the publication of a work of general interest. Freedom to report the truth was a basic right to which the law gave a very high level of protection. It was difficult to envisage any circumstances in which speech which was not deceptive, threatening or possibly abusive could give rise to liability in tort for wilful infringement of another's right to personal safety. The right to report the truth was justification in itself. As to the mental element, the Court of Appeal found that the necessary intention could be imputed to R. There was a critical difference between imputing the existence of an intention as a matter of law and inferring the existence of an intention as a matter of fact. The former was a vestige of a previous age and had no proper role in the modern law of tort. The abolition of imputed intent cleared the way to proper consideration of two important questions about the mental element of the tort. The first was whether, where a recognised psychiatric illness was the product of severe mental or emotional distress, it was necessary that the defendant should have intended to cause illness or whether it was sufficient that he intended to cause severe distress which in fact resulted in recognisable illness. The second was whether recklessness was sufficient. The answer to the first question was to choose the second option. Recklessness should not be included in the definition of the mental element. To hold that the necessary mental element was intention to cause physical harm or severe mental or emotional distress struck a just balance. It meant that a person who actually intended to cause another to suffer severe mental or emotional distress bore the risk of legal liability if the deliberately inflicted severe distress caused the other to suffer a recognised psychiatric illness. It would be possible to limit liability for the tort to cases in which the defendant's conduct was "extreme, flagrant or outrageous", as in Canada. That argument had not so far been advanced in this country. The instant court was inclined to the view, which was necessarily obiter, that the tort was sufficiently contained by the combination of (a) the conduct element requiring words or conduct directed at the claimant for which there was no justification or excuse, (b) the mental element requiring an intention to cause at least severe mental or emotional distress, and (c) the consequence element requiring physical harm or recognised psychiatric illness. In this case, there was no basis for supposing that R had an actual intention to cause psychiatric harm or severe mental or emotional distress to O. There was no arguable case that publication of the book would constitute the requisite conduct element of the tort or that R had the requisite mental element, Wilkinson v Downton considered (see paras 73-77, 80-84, 87-90 of judgment).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Wilson; Lord Toulson
COUNSEL For the appellant: Hugh Tomlinson QC, Sara Mansoori, Edward Craven. For the first respondent: Matthew Nicklin QC, Adam Speker. For the second respondent: Antony White QC, Jacob Dean. For the interveners: Adrienne Page QC, Can Yeginsu.





NAME (wl) W v Essex County Council and Another
CITATION W v Essex County Council and Another [2001] 2 AC 592
CIT [2001] 2 AC 592
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Duty of Care; Fostering; Local Authorities' Powers and Duties; Sexual Abuse
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY W appealed against a decision upholding the striking out of a claim in negligence for the psychiatric injury resulting from the placement with them by a local authority of a child it knew to be a sex abuser and who subsequently abused W's children. W, who had informed ECC they were unwilling owing to the risk to their children to have a known sex abuser in their home, argued ECC had thereby been in breach of their duty of care in placing a known abuser with them. The court held that (1) a claim for psychiatric injury was clearly arguable, and (2) it was not possible to conclude the psychiatric injury claimed was outside the range recognised in law.
SUMMARY W, foster carers, sued ECC, the local authority, who, despite W's stipulation that they would not house a child known or suspected of being a child abuser, placed G with them, who was known to ECC as having committed sexual offences and who subsequently seriously abused W's children. W brought claims against ECC for damages for psychiatric injury suffered upon learning of the abuse to their children and originating from a sense of responsibility for G's actions. They alleged that ECC was in breach of its duty of care in placing G with them contrary to their express wishes. The judge at first instance struck out W's claim and W's appeal was dismissed ([1999] Fam. 90) on the grounds that the claims were unarguable and therefore had no prospect of success. W appealed.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) on the facts alleged, regardless of whether they were ultimately found to be right or wrong, it was impossible to say that the claim would so clearly not succeed that it ought not to be pursued to trial. It was not sufficient for striking out purposes that W might struggle to prove their case, but rather to consider whether, if the facts were proved, the claim would nevertheless fail, and (2) liability for psychiatric injury could constitute a head of damage subject to a number of limitations, McLoughlin v O'Brian [1983] 1 A.C. 410 and Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 A.C. 310 considered. The categorisation of those claiming to be included as either primary or secondary victims was not conclusive. It depended on the facts of each case and there was insufficient information at this stage to rule that these circumstances were outside the range of psychiatric injury currently recognised by the law. The pleadings indicated that the injury was more than "acute grief" but a detailed investigation of the facts was required to ascertain whether the necessary temporal and spatial limitations were satisfied, White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1999] 2 A.C. 455 considered.
JUDGE Lord Slynn of Hadley; Lord Steyn; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough; Lord Millett
COUNSEL For W: Allan Levy Q.C. and Elizabeth Anne Gumbel Q.C. For ECC: Edward Faulks Q.C. and Andrew Warnock.





NAME (wl) Chadwick v British Railways Board
CITATION Chadwick v British Railways Board [2016] UKSC 17
CIT [2016] UKSC 17
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Financial Regulation; Collective Investment Schemes; Land Banking Schemes; Unauthorised Investment Business
ABSTRACT A company appealed against a decision ([2014] EWCA Civ 435, [2015] 1 All E.R. 1) that "land banking" schemes it had operated were unauthorised collective investment schemes within the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 s.235.
ABSTRACT The company had acquired land and divided it into plots, which it sold to investors. The company was not an authorised person under the Act. The Financial Conduct Authority alleged that the schemes were collective investment schemes. The judge accepted investors' evidence that they were told that the company would have the sites re-zoned for residential building or secure planning approval, and that they would receive a share of the proceeds of sale once developers bought the sites. He held that there had been "arrangements" within s.235(1) as the investors had described; that the "property" for the purposes of s.235(1) was each site as a whole; on that basis, that no investor had had control over the site as a whole within s.235(2); and that the property had been managed by an operator, namely the company, within s.235(3)(b).
ABSTRACT The company argued that
ABSTRACT (1) the judge had erred in his identification of the component parts of the arrangements, and that the focus should have been on the arrangements as made by the operator, including the documents prepared for that purpose, rather than as the investors had perceived them;
ABSTRACT (2) the relevant "property" for the purposes of s.235(1) was the aggregate of the interests owned by the individual investors, not the site as a whole, and it was they who had ultimate control over the management of the property, in the same way as did the individual tenants in a block of flats, where there was no collective investment scheme.
SUMMARY Certain "land banking" schemes, under which a company marketed plots of land on sites to investors by undertaking to progress planning procedures at the sites, procure the sites' sale and pay the investors a share of the consideration, were unauthorised collective investment schemes within the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 s.235.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The content of the arrangements had been a matter of fact for the judge. The distinction between the arrangements as made by the operator and others' perception of the arrangements was artificial and unrealistic. The judge had been entitled to find that the understandings of the investors had conformed to what was intended by the operator. He had not been required to give special weight to documents without regard to their context. The judge had concluded that arrangements within s.235 had been made when plots were marketed and investors paid their deposits, the object of the arrangements being that the company should achieve a sale of the site after seeking to enhance its value by improving the prospects for housing development, the price to be shared between the owners. That conclusion was amply supported by the evidence and disclosed no error of law (see paras 54-55, 92 of judgment).
HELD (2) The "property" for the purposes of s.235(1) was each of the company's sites taken as a whole, not the individual plots. The distinction between the "property" being the site and it being the aggregate of the plots was not one of substance. The property for the purposes of s.235(1) was the whole site. That definition remained the same in principle throughout the section. However, management control under s.235(2) and s.235(3) could be achieved in different ways. It was necessary to consider the mechanisms by which the participants on the one hand or the operator on the other managed, or had management control of, the property. "Control" within s.235(2) was not confined to legal control; it had to refer to the reality of how the arrangements were to be operated, which could or could not involve rights or powers enforceable in law, Sky Land Consultants Plc, Re [2010] EWHC 399 (Ch) applied. The judge had found that the facts of the instant case meant that in substance each investor got rights under a scheme that provided for someone else to manage the property. He had clearly been entitled to do so. The management of the property had comprised the steps necessary to obtain planning permission and secure a sale. The investors had no part in or control over those activities. Even if attention was directed to the rights attached to individual units, there was no parallel with individual lessees in a block of flats. They had control over the management of both their own flats and the common parts. The investors' ownership of the individual units was not linked to any exercise of management control. Control of the management activities for the property as a whole had been with the company. Although its control had not been underpinned by legal rights over the units, that did not affect the substance of the arrangements (paras 56-63, 93, 96-102). The judge had considered that s.235(2) required that investors had not actually exercised control. "Control" of property meant the ability to decide what was to happen to it. Either the arrangements conferred control on the investors or they did not. That was necessarily to be viewed from the time the arrangements were made. The test could not depend on what happened afterwards. The question was in whom control would be vested were control to be required, Brown v InnovatorOne Plc [2012] EWHC 1321 (Comm) doubted (para.94).
JUDGE Lord Mance JSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Sumption JSC; Lord Carnwath JSC; Lord Hodge JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Michael Blair QC, Robert Purves. For the respondent: Nicholas Peacock QC, Tim Penny QC, Philip Hinks.





NAME (wl) Boumedien v Delta Display Ltd
CITATION Boumedien v Delta Display Ltd [2007] EWCA Civ 368
CIT [2007] EWCA Civ 368
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure; Costs; Part 36 Payments; Pre-Action Costs; Pre-Action Protocols
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (S) appealed against an order awarding him only limited pre-action costs and no costs of the action in which he had succeeded against the respondent solicitors (T).
ABSTRACT S had entered into purchase contracts in respect of two properties "off-plan" conditional on obtaining mortgage finance by a particular date. S did not obtain finance by that date. The contracts were later rescinded by the developer. T acted for both sides in the transaction. T accepted that in the circumstances they had acted in breach of duty in either failing to obtain an extension of time or failing to take S's instructions, but argued that S had suffered no loss because he would not have been able to raise the finance to purchase either property. In pre-action correspondence, T's insurers suggested that S's loss should be limited to the loss of opportunity to purchase one of the properties and made a Part 36 offer. That amount was paid into court once proceedings were commenced. The judge held that S would have been able to purchase only one property, but awarded damages that exceeded the Part 36 payment. However, the judge awarded S no costs of the action and only limited pre-action costs.
ABSTRACT T submitted that the judge had found by implication that, if S had engaged in negotiations with T on the basis of one property, the case would have settled because T would have offered more than the money in court, and that, in running the external funding point in relation to two properties, S was acting unreasonably and that those factors entitled the judge to depart from the general rule that the successful party was entitled to his costs from the unsuccessful party and to reduce S's recovery to nil.
SUMMARY A judge had misdirected himself as to the applicability of the general rule on costs and had been wrong to reduce the recovery of costs by the successful party to nil for failure to engage in negotiations in accordance with a pre-action protocol.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) A defendant who had paid money into court could not argue that if a claimant had been more reasonable he would have offered more. A defendant had the remedy in his own hands where a claimant was being intransigent. He could pay into court the maximum sum he was prepared to pay. The judge had not found that it was unreasonable to have run the external funding case in relation to the two properties. S's loss on that issue was clearly a factor that the judge had been entitled to take into account in considering the extent to which the general rule should not apply, since CPR r.44.3 required a judge to take all circumstances into account. (2) The judge had found that, if he were to disregard T's willingness to engage in negotiations on a one property basis and if he were to look at the matter as if there were no Part 36 payment, he would have awarded S two-thirds to three-quarters of his costs. In so finding the judge must have been of the view that the running of a case in relation to external funds being available so as to be able to buy two properties merited a discount of one-quarter or one-third of the costs that S as the successful party would have been entitled to absent any payment in. He had then reduced any award down to nil on the basis that S's failure to engage in negotiations was a failure to comply with the pre-action protocol. However he had failed to take into account the extent to which that factor had already in his reasoning reduced S's entitlement by one-third or one-quarter. No further reduction should have been made for the fact that S had not engaged in negotiations in accordance with the protocol. In the circumstances, to reduce the recovery of costs to nil for failure to comply with the protocol was so seriously wrong as to be outside the generous ambit within which reasonable disagreement was possible. The judge had misdirected himself as to the applicability of the general rule and had failed to appreciate that the reduction he had first made reflected the appropriate discount for the running of a case that failed. (3) It was necessary for the court to exercise the discretion afresh. Guidance could be obtained from the judge's view as to the way he would have treated S as the successful party without T's willingness to negotiate and in the absence of a Part 36 offer, with a further discount for non-compliance with the protocol. On that basis S should have 60 per cent of his costs from the date of the Part 36 offer. The judge's order for the period up until that date was not disturbed.
JUDGE Waller LJ; Tuckey LJ; Jacob LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Giles Maynard-Connor. For the respondent: Neil Hext.





NAME (wl) Monk v PC Harrington Ltd
CITATION Monk v PC Harrington Ltd [2008] EWHC 1879 (QB)
CIT [2008] EWHC 1879 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Torts; Class of Persons; Damages; Primary Victims; Psychiatric Harm; Reasonable Belief; Rescuers
ABSTRACT The claimant (M) claimed damages for psychiatric injury suffered as a result of helping victims of a construction accident for which the defendant construction company (P) had admitted liability.
ABSTRACT M had been working as a self-employed foreman on site during the construction of Wembley Stadium. M was there when a temporary platform fell 60 feet onto two fellow workers. One of the men died from his injuries shortly after the accident whilst the other suffered a broken leg. Having arrived at the scene of the accident, M tried to help both men and, specifically, to comfort the man with the broken leg. Thereafter, as a result of the accident, M began to suffer from symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and associated depression amounting to a psychiatric illness for which he received various treatments and medications. Later, M ceased to go to work. The issue for determination was whether M fell within the class of persons to whom the law would afford a remedy for psychiatric injury caused by the admitted negligence of an employer.
ABSTRACT M submitted that (1) his involvement in the accident was such that he fulfilled the necessary conditions to recover compensation as a rescuer; (2) even if he was unable to bring himself within the rescuer category of primary victim, he could nevertheless establish the necessary proximity to the accident, which he believed he had caused, in order that he could be regarded as an unwilling participant.
ABSTRACT 
SUMMARY A man who had suffered psychiatric injury as a result of assistance provided to victims of a construction accident was not entitled to damages as a primary victim. Although he had assisted at the scene he could not prove that he had a legitimate fear for his own safety at the time or that he reasonably believed he had caused the accident; accordingly, he was neither a rescuer nor an unwilling participant in the accident.
HELD Judgment for defendant.
HELD (1) M provided a significant help in comforting the injured men until the emergency services arrived; that assistance was neither trivial nor peripheral and entitled him to be regarded as a rescuer, White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1998] Q.B. 254 and Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 A.C. 310 applied. However, the evidence showed that it was improbable that in rushing to the aid of the injured men, M believed he was putting his own physical safety at risk; if M did hold such a belief, it was unreasonable, Page v Smith [1996] A.C. 155 considered. Accordingly, M could not establish that he was a primary victim on the basis of his involvement as a rescuer. (2) For the purposes of establishing himself as a primary victim as an unwilling participant, M had to show that his injuries were induced by a genuine belief that he had caused another person's injury or death, Alcock, McFarlane v Wilkinson [1997] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 259 and Dooley v Cammell Laird & Co Ltd [1951] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 271 applied. Although the traumatic effects of the accident upon M's health were increased by a belief that he might have caused the accident, there was no reasonable basis for such a belief. Accordingly, it was not reasonably foreseeable that someone in his position would suffer psychiatric injury as a result of such a belief.
HELD 
JUDGE George Leggatt QC
COUNSEL For the claimant: Charles Pugh. For the defendants: Jonathan Watt-Pringle QC.





NAME (wl) McFarlane v EE Caledonia Ltd
CITATION McFarlane v EE Caledonia Ltd [1994] 2 All ER 1
CIT [1994] 2 All ER 1
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Duty of Care; Nervous Shock; Remoteness; Torts; Witnesses
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Foreseeability; psychiatric injury; duty of care; off-duty worker witnessing events on oil rig; whether employer liable
SUMMARY A bystander who witnesses a disaster cannot recover damages for psychiatric harm caused unless a sufficient degree of proximity between the bystander and the victim can be shown. P was off-duty on board a support ship when an explosion occurred, and the oil rig on which P normally worked was engulfed in flames. P sought damages for psychiatric harm which he suffered by witnessing the destruction of the rig.
HELD that in the circumstances it could not have been reasonably foreseen that P and other off-duty workers on board the support vessel would suffer psychiatric harm. Neither could it be shown that a man of ordinary fortitude in a similar position would have been so affected, consequently, the injuries being unforeseeable, P would not be allowed to succeed.
JUDGE Ralph Gibson LJ; Stuart-Smith LJ; McCowan LJ
COUNSEL For C: Adrian Hamilton Q.C. and Alistair Schaff Q.C. For M: Nigel Wilkinson Q.C. and Anne Guggenheim.





NAME (wl) McLoughlin v O'Brian
CITATION McLoughlin v O'Brian [1983] 1 AC 410
CIT [1983] 1 AC 410
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Accidents; Damages; Nervous Shock; Remoteness
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Remoteness of damage; nervous shock; plaintiff not at the scene of accident
SUMMARY The House of Lords extended liability for nervous shock to all cases where it was reasonably foreseeable that the plaintiff would suffer such injury, irrespective of any limitations of time and space. One of M's children was killed and her husband and other two children were severely injured in a road accident. The incident was reported to M while she was at her home, some two miles from the scene. At the hospital M saw the extent of the injuries to her family and heard of the death of her daughter, as a result of which she suffered severe and persisting nervous shock, for which she claimed damages.
HELD that the test of liability for nervous shock is the ordinary test of reasonable foreseeability. If it was reasonably foreseeable that M would suffer nervous shock, even though nowhere near the scene of the accident, she was entitled to recover. In considering the question of reasonable foreseeability there are no legal limitations of time, space, distance, nature of injuries, or the relationship of victim to plaintiff, although these are all factors to be considered (Bourhill v Young [1943] A.C. 92 and Hambrook v Stokes Bros [1925] 1 K.B. 141 applied; King v Phillips [1953] 1 Q.B. 429 dictum approved).
JUDGE Lord Wilberforce; Lord Edmund-Davies; Lord Russell; Lord Scarman; Lord Bridge





NAME (wl) Taylor v A Novo Ltd (UK)
CITATION Taylor v A Novo Ltd (UK) [2013] EWCA Civ 194
CIT [2013] EWCA Civ 194
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Employment; Damages; Employers' Liability; Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; Public Policy; Secondary Victims
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (N) appealed against a judge's decision that the respondent (T) was entitled to claim damages from N as a secondary victim of an accident which led to the death of T's mother (M).
ABSTRACT M worked for N and was injured when a fellow employee caused a stack of racking boards to fall onto her. She was recovering well when three weeks later she unexpectedly collapsed and died due to a deep vein thrombosis and consequent pulmonary emboli caused by the injuries sustained in the accident. T witnessed M's death and suffered significant post-traumatic stress disorder in respect of which she sought damages from N. The judge found that the point at issue had not been previously decided. He concluded that the event which caused damage to T was the sudden death of M and that there was no gap between that event and the injury she suffered, which was the reasonably foreseeable consequence of N's negligence.
ABSTRACT N submitted that proximity was lacking because T was not present at the accident or involved in its immediate aftermath. T argued that the collapse and death of M was the relevant event and, as she had witnessed it, proximity was established.
SUMMARY The daughter of a woman who died unexpectedly weeks after an accident at work could not establish proximity in her damages claim against the employer because she had not witnessed the accident or its immediate aftermath, although she had been present when her mother died. It was the accident and not the death that was the relevant event for the purposes of establishing proximity in her damages claim arising from the psychiatric harm she suffered after witnessing her mother's death.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD The instant case did not raise questions which typically arose in secondary victim cases; instead the issue was whether M's death was a relevant incident for the purposes of T's claim as a secondary victim. T had to show that there was a relationship of proximity between N and herself in the legal sense. Unfortunately, proximity depended more on the court's perception of what was the reasonable area for the imposition of liability than any process of logic. In the instant case, N's negligence had two consequences separated by three weeks in time: there was the accident which caused M's injuries, and then there was her death. There was clearly a relationship between N and M, but to allow T to recover as a secondary victim on the instant facts was going too far. Had the judge been correct then T would, subject to proving causation, have been able to recover damages had M's death occurred months, possibly years later. However, had she died at the time of the accident and T suffered shock coming onto the scene shortly afterwards, T would not have been able to recover damages because she would have failed to satisfy the physical proximity control mechanism. That T could recover in the first situation but not in the latter would strike the ordinary reasonable person as incomprehensible. Therefore, it was not reasonable to impose liability on N for T's psychiatric illness. The judge's approach potentially extended the scope of liability to secondary victims considerably further than had been done before. The court had for policy reasons confined the rights of secondary victims by means of strict control mechanisms. Those same reasons militated against any further substantial extension unless done by Parliament. The judge was wrong to hold that M's death was the relevant event for the purpose of deciding the proximity question, Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 A.C. 310 followed, White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1999] 2 A.C. 455, Taylor v Somerset HA [1993] P.I.Q.R. P262 applied, W v Essex CC [2001] 2 A.C. 592 considered, Walters v North Glamorgan NHS Trust [2002] EWCA Civ 1792, [2003] P.I.Q.R. P16 and Galli-Atkinson v Seghal [2003] EWCA Civ 697, [2003] Lloyd's Rep. Med. 285 distinguished on the basis that the question whether the death, being a separate event, was a relevant event for the purposes of a claim by a secondary victim did not arise in those cases. The observations of Gibson LJ in Sion v Hampstead HA [1994] 5 Med. L.R. 170 were obiter and were not binding, Sion considered (see paras 25, 27-31, 34-35 of judgment).
JUDGE Lord Dyson MR; Moore-Bick LJ; Kitchin LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Charles Cory-Wright QC, Charles Bagot. For the respondent: Edward Bartley Jones QC, Simon Earlam.





NAME (wl) Liverpool Womens Hospital NHS Foundation Trust v Ronayne
CITATION Liverpool Womens Hospital NHS Foundation Trust v Ronayne [2015] EWCA Civ 588
CIT [2015] EWCA Civ 588
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Causation; Hospitals; Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; Psychiatric Harm; Secondary Victims
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT An NHS trust appealed against the award of damages to the respondent (R) as a secondary victim of its negligence.
ABSTRACT R's wife (W) had undergone a hysterectomy which had been performed negligently. A suture had been misplaced in her colon, causing her to develop septicaemia and peritonitis. After being discharged, she became unwell and was re-admitted. During a period of one or two days, R observed a rapid deterioration in W's condition, and described two distinct episodes which he found particularly distressing. The first occurred shortly before she underwent emergency exploratory surgery, when he observed her connected to various machines such as drips and monitors. The second was the following day when he saw her in her post-operative condition. She was unconscious and connected to a ventilator. Her arms, legs and face were very swollen and pressure pads were in place. W remained in intensive care for nine weeks, but made a complete recovery. R claimed that he suffered post-traumatic stress disorder as a consequence of seeing her sudden deterioration, particularly on the two occasions he referred to. He described losing control of his stammer, feeling overwhelmed, powerless, out of control, detached, intensely angry, shocked, tense, tearful, agitated, irritable, sleep-disturbed, negative, pessimistic and low in mood. He also experienced intrusive memories. One expert concluded that R had suffered from PTSD but another concluded that he had suffered a mild adjustment disorder. The judge found that R had not suffered from PTSD, as he had not experienced the recurrent flashbacks and nightmares which commonly characterised that condition. However, he concluded that R had suffered from a psychiatric illness, triggered by W's sudden shocking state and condition during the period of one or two days after her admission to hospital. The issues were whether (i) the events concerned were "horrifying" in the sense necessary to found a secondary victim case; (ii) the sudden appreciation of those events caused R's psychiatric illness.
SUMMARY A husband was not entitled to claim for the psychiatric injury which he suffered following a hospital's negligence in performing a hysterectomy on his wife. He claimed that he suffered post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of seeing his wife's state during two specific episodes. However, the necessary element of suddenness did not exist. Further, his wife's appearance was not exceptional for a person in hospital in such circumstances and was not "horrifying" in the sense used in the authorities.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The circumstances fell far short of those which had been recognised as founding secondary victim liability. The judge had been wrong to treat as one event the period of about 36 hours beginning with the sight of W before surgery, through to the moment when he saw her in her post-operative swollen state. Unlike the situation in Walters v North Glamorgan NHS Trust [2002] EWCA Civ 1792, [2003] P.I.Q.R. P16, there was no "seamless tale with an obvious beginning and an equally obvious end". Instead, there was a series of events over a period of time. R's perception of what he saw on the two specific occasions was in each case informed by information which he had received in advance. Before the operation, he already knew that abnormalities had been found and he knew before seeing W that she was about to go to theatre for surgery. It was artificial to regard the sight of her in her pre-operative condition as the beginning of an event distinct from what had gone before. It was equally artificial to describe the sight of W in her post-operative condition as the end of a distinct event. It had been explained to R, before he saw her, that W's life was in danger and he knew that the 24 hours following the operation would be critical. It was all part of a continuum. The necessary element of suddenness did not exist. Further, what R saw on those two occasions was not horrifying by objective standards, Shorter v Surrey and Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust [2015] EWHC 614 (QB), (2015) 144 B.M.L.R. 136 applied. Walters was the only known reported case in which a claimant had succeeded as a secondary victim after observing the consequences of clinical negligence in a hospital setting. That was unsurprising. In hospital, one had to expect to see patients attached to machines and drips and to see things that one might not like to see. W's appearance was as would ordinarily be expected of a person in hospital in such circumstances. It was not exceptional or "horrifying" in the sense in which that word was used in the authorities. It did not lead to a sudden violent agitation of the mind because R had been prepared to witness a person in a desperate condition and was, moreover, already extremely angry, Walters distinguished, White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1999] 2 A.C. 455 and Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] 1 A.C. 310 followed (see paras 17, 33-42 of judgment). (2) The claim failed because the events had not been" horrifying" in the necessary sense. It was therefore unnecessary to determine whether the judge had been justified in finding that R's adjustment disorder had been caused by W's appearance on the two distinct occasions concerned, as opposed to being caused by her ill health. However, it seemed that the judge had given insufficient weight to the circumstance that R was already extremely angry before he saw W after her operation. Further, having found none of the persistent recurrent flashbacks or nightmares which characterise PTSD, the judge should have been far less ready to attribute causative potency to the two visual images rather than to the whole set of circumstances (paras 43-48).
JUDGE Sullivan LJ; Tomlinson LJ; Beatson LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Charles Cory-Wright QC. For the respondent: Amanda Yip QC, Simon Fox.





NAME (wl) Coltman v Bibby Takers Ltd
CITATION Coltman v Bibby Takers Ltd [1988] AC 276
CIT [1988] AC 276
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Employment; Employers' Liability; Equipment; Interpretation; Seaworthiness
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Employer's liability; defective equipment; whether ship "equipment"
SUMMARY A ship, however large, comes within the definition of "equipment" under the Employers Liability (Defective Equipment) Act 1969 s.1(1) . In 1980 a ship owned by the defendants sank off Japan with the loss of all hands. The representatives of one of the crew brought an action claiming death was caused during employment in consequence of defects in equipment, namely the ship. The question whether the ship was "equipment" was tried as a preliminary issue. The judge held that it was, the Court of Appeal that it was not.
HELD allowing the appeal, that a ship provided by the owner for purposes of business was "equipment" for the purpose of the 1969 Act regardless of its size.
JUDGE Lord Keith of Kinkel; Lord Roskill; Lord Griffiths; Lord Oliver of Aylmerton; Lord Goff of Chieveley





NAME (wl) Walker v Northumberland County Council
CITATION Walker v Northumberland County Council [1995] 1 All ER 737
CIT [1995] 1 All ER 737
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Employment; Duty of Care; Employers' Liability; Health and Safety at Work; Psychiatric Illness
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Contract of employment; duty to take reasonable care for health and safety of employee; duty to provide a safe system of work; whether duty extends to risk of psychiatric illness
SUMMARY An employer's duty to take reasonable care to provide his employee with a safe system of work and take reasonable steps to prevent him from risks which are reasonably foreseeable extended to risks of psychiatric illness. W, who was responsible for four teams of social services fieldworkers employed by the NCC, suffered a mental breakdown in November 1986 and was forced to spend four months away from work. This breakdown followed a lengthy period over which W's work pressures increased significantly and, despite repeated attempts to do so, he had not persuaded the NCC either to increase staff or provide guidance as to work distribution or prioritisation. Upon his return he was offered no additional support from the NCC and by September 16, 1987 he was advised to go on sick leave and suffered a second mental breakdown. He was dismissed on the grounds of permanent ill-health in February 1988 and brought an action for damages against the NCC for breach of their duty of care to take reasonable steps to avoid exposing him to a health-endangering workload.
HELD upholding W's claim for damages, that (1) there is no logical reason why the risk of psychiatric damage should be excluded from the scope of an employer's duty to provide his employee with a reasonably safe system of work and to take reasonable steps to protect him from risks which are reasonably foreseeable, Bolton v Stone [1947-51] C.L.Y. 6789 considered. Once a duty of care has been established the standard of care required for the performance of that duty must be measured against the yardstick of reasonable conduct on the part of a person in the position of that person who owes the duty, Glasgow Corp v Muir [1943] A.C. 448 , Paris v Stepney BC [1951] A.C. 367 considered, and the practicability of the remedial measures must clearly take into account the resources and facilities of the person or body owing the duty of care, British Railways Board v Herrington [1972] A.C. 877 considered. The duty does not extend to negligible risks but only to materially substantial risks. Although the evidence established that prior to W's first breakdown it was reasonably foreseeable that W might sustain a mental breakdown of some sort in consequence of his work, it was not reasonably foreseeable to the NCC that the workload to which he was exposed gave rise to a material risk of mental illness, in the sense that the risk to which W was exposed was higher than that which would ordinarily affect a social services middle manager in his position; (2) when W returned to work after his first illness it was reasonably foreseeable to the NCC that if he was again exposed to the same workload as he had been handling at the time of his first breakdown without substantial back-up there was a sizeable risk that he would again succumb to mental illness and that such illness would be likely to end his career; and (3) in deciding whether it was reasonable for the NCC to take action to alleviate that risk regard must be had to the acute staffing problems then experienced by the NCC. However, it was wrong to say that, in the context of a contract of employment between a statutory body and an employee, the statutory body could rely on considerations of policy both to justify a decision which caused damage or injury to the employee, and to prevent the court from evaluating the reasonableness of the body's conduct, Anns v Merton LBC [1978] A.C. 728 , Lavis v Kent CC 90 L.G.R. 416 considered. Having regard to the size of the risk of a repetition of W's mental illness and the likely gravity of that illness, the standard of care expected of a reasonable local authority required that the NCC take measures to ensure that W's workload was permanently reduced, either through additional assistance or restructuring of the social services.
JUDGE Colman J
COUNSEL For W: Brian Langstaff Q.C. and Andrew Buchan. For NCC: Simon Hawkesworth Q.C. and Richard Craven.





NAME (wl) Barber v Somerset County Council
CITATION Barber v Somerset County Council [2004] UKHL 13
CIT [2004] UKHL 13
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Employment; Education; Personal Injury; Local Government; Depression; Duty of Care; Employers' Duties; Foreseeability; Occupational Stress; Personal Injury; Standard of Care; Teachers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY A local authority was in breach of its duty to its employee to take reasonable care to avoid injuring his health where it had become aware that his difficulties at work were having an adverse effect on his mental health, but had taken no steps to help him.
SUMMARY B appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 76, [2002] 2 All E.R. 1) that the local authority had not been in breach of its duty to take reasonable care to avoid injuring his health. B had been employed by the local authority as a teacher. In September 1995 there was a restructuring of staffing at the school at which B was employed, and B was told that in order to maintain his salary level he would have to take on further responsibilities. B worked between 61 and 70 hours per week, and often had to work in the evenings and at weekends. In February 1996 B spoke of "work overload" to the school's deputy headteacher, and made enquiries about taking early retirement. In May B was absent from work for three weeks, his absence certified by his GP as being due to stress and depression. On his return to work B met with members of the school's senior management team and said that he was not coping with his workload and that the situation was becoming detrimental to his health. He was not met with an entirely sympathetic response and no steps were taken to assist him. B contacted his GP on a number of occasions about work related stress and in November 1996, after losing control and shaking a pupil, he left the school and did not return. Since that time B had been unable to work as a teacher, or to do any work other than undemanding part time work. The issue was whether the Court of Appeal had been right to conclude that the evidence before the trial judge did not sustain a finding that the school authorities ought to have foreseen that, if B continued with his existing workload, he was liable to develop a psychiatric illness.
HELD allowing the appeal (Lord Scott dissenting), that the issue of the breach of the local authority's duty of care to B was borderline. The trial judge, who saw and heard the witnesses, had concluded that the local authority had been in breach and there was insufficient reason for the Court of Appeal to set aside that finding. The test was whether the local authority had fallen below the standard properly to be expected of a reasonable and prudent employer taking positive steps for the safety of his workers in the light of what he knew or ought to have known, Stokes v Guest Keen & Nettlefold (Bolt & Nuts) Ltd [1968] 1 W.L.R. 1776 applied. The Court of Appeal had failed to give adequate weight to the fact that B, an experienced and conscientious teacher, had been absent for three weeks with no physical ailment, such absence having been certified by his GP as being due to stress and depression. The duty to take some action had arisen in June or July 1996 when B had seen members of the school's senior management team, and had continued so long as nothing had been done to help him. The senior management team should have made enquiries about B's problems and discovered what they could have done to ease them, and the fact that the school as a whole was facing severe problems, with all the teachers stressed and overworked, did not mean that there was nothing that could have been done to help B, Cross v Highlands & Islands Enterprise 2001 S.L.T. 1060 considered. The trial judge had been entitled to form the view that the school's senior management team were in a position of continuing breach of the employer's duty of care, and that had caused B's breakdown in November 1996. (Per Lord Scott) The Court of Appeal had accurately expressed the principles that ought to be applied where a complaint was made of psychiatric illness brought about by stress at work, and these principles were to be preferred to the decision in Stokes , which addressed the question of whether the employer had provided a safe system of work, rather than the problems of psychiatric illness caused by stress.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Steyn; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Rodger of Earlsferry; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe
COUNSEL For the appellant: Brian Langstaff QC, Andrew Buchan. For the respondents: Andrew Collender QC, Andrew Hogarth QC, Charlotte Reynolds.





NAME (wl) Thompson v Smiths Shiprepairers (North Shields) Ltd
CITATION Thompson v Smiths Shiprepairers (North Shields) Ltd [1984] QB 405
CIT [1984] QB 405
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Shipping; Industrial Diseases; Negligence; Noise; Shipyards
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Duty of care; shipyard noise; hearing loss
SUMMARY P had worked in D's shipyard since 1944. D knew that noise levels in the yards would expose workmen to risks of hearing loss, but like all those concerned in the industry had accepted deafness as an inescapable risk. By the early 1960s the need to protect employees against noise became generally known, and ear protectors became available. D provided P with ear protectors in the early 1970s. P suffered hearing loss before 1963, but this became worse thereafter. P sued D, who relied in defence on the general practice of inaction in the industry.
HELD that D could only rely on this defence for the years up to about 1963, while there was a lack of social awareness on the part of employers. Once knowledge and protectors became available, D owed a duty of care, and was in breach of that duty between 1963 and the time when he provided ear protection. P was therefore only entitled to recover for damage suffered between those dates. Full allowances in P's favour would be made for the uncertainties known to be involved in any apportionment.
JUDGE Mustill J





NAME (wl) McDermid v Nash Dredging and Reclamation Co Ltd
CITATION McDermid v Nash Dredging and Reclamation Co Ltd [1987] AC 906
CIT [1987] AC 906
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Health and Safety at Work; Employers' Liability; Limitations; Safety
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Safe system of work; vicarious liability; limitation of liability
SUMMARY M was employed by N Co as a deckhand and in the course of his employment worked on a tug owned by S Co under the direction of its captain who was employed by S Co. M's job was to untie the tug from a dredger and then signal to the captain that it was safe to move away. On one occasion the captain started to move the tug away before he received the signal, with the result that M was injured by the rope.
HELD that (1) N Co owed M a duty to devise a safe system of work and to ensure that it was operated. They remained liable even though they had delegated the performance of the duty to the captain, whose part had been central to its operation. The captain was negligent and W Co was liable; (2) N Co had no interest in the tug within s.3(1) of the Act of 1958, and the captain had remained the servant of S Co under s.3(2)(a). Accordingly N Co could not limit their liability pursuant to the Act.
JUDGE Lord Bridge of Harwich; Lord Hailsham LC; Lord Brandon of Oakbrook; Lord Mackay of Clashfern; Lord Ackner





NAME (wl) Coxall v Goodyear Great Britain Ltd
CITATION Coxall v Goodyear Great Britain Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 1010
CIT [2002] EWCA Civ 1010
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Health and Safety at Work; Asthma; Employees; Employers' Duties; Occupational Health; Risk
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Claimant with predisposition to asthma employed at defendant's tyre factory on paint section - Claimant informed by works doctor that claimant ought not to work with paint - No action taken by employer and claimant collapsed and diagnosed with occupational asthma - Employer under duty to remove claimant from dangerous work situation - Employers liability dependant on magnitude of risk involved to be assessed on a case by case basis.
SUMMARY G appealed against the award of damages to C, who had suffered occupational asthma as a result of working as a paint and line operator at G's tyre factory. In response to health concerns expressed by the workforce following a new lubricant paint being introduced G had provided protective equipment for use when spraying. However, despite the availability of this equipment, C should not have worked with the new paint because he suffered from a mild constitutional predisposition to asthma. Initially, neither C nor his employer were aware of this. C was seen by the works doctor complaining of severe headaches and giddiness. The doctor sent a memo to the business team manager stating that in his opinion C should not work with the new paint. The memo was not received by the team leader and in the result C remained at work as a paint and line operator. A few weeks later, after having been taken to hospital following a fall, C was formally diagnosed as suffering from occupational asthma caused by exposure to irritant fumes at work. The judge found that whilst G had taken all reasonable precautions up to the date C was seen by the works doctor, thereafter G had been under a duty to remove him from a dangerous work situation and that a reasonable employer would have acted within a few days of the doctor's memo having been sent. He awarded damages on the basis that G was liable for the exacerbation of C's condition through his additional exposure to fume irritant. G contended that in cases such as the present one, it was for the employee to decide whether or not to take the risk of continuing in his job, there being no duty upon the employer to remove the employee from safe work, still less to dismiss him because he was not suited to the work.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that whether or not an employer in a particular case was under a duty to remove an employee from employment which exposed him to a risk of physical danger was dependant upon the magnitude of the risk involved, Withers v Perry Chain Co Ltd [1961] 1 W.L.R. 1314 distinguished. In the instant case, the trial judge had been correct in concluding that G had been negligent in failing to follow the advice of their works doctor by moving C to alternative work or by dismissing him.
JUDGE Simon Brown LJ; Brooke LJ
COUNSEL For C: Satinder Hunjan Q.C. For G: Simon Beard.





NAME (wl) Stevenson Jordan & Harrison v McDonald & Evans
CITATION Stevenson Jordan & Harrison v McDonald & Evans [2016] EWHC 213 (Fam)
CIT [2016] EWHC 213 (Fam)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Family Law Other Related Subjects: International Law; Diplomatic Immunity; Financial Orders; International Maritime Organisation; Residence; Talaq Divorce
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The respondent husband applied to strike out the applicant wife's claim for financial relief in divorce proceedings based on his purported protection from civil action arising from diplomatic immunity.
ABSTRACT The husband was a wealthy Saudi businessman; the applicant was his second wife. He had since married for a third time; all three matrimonial homes had been in the UK and the children of each marriage were raised in the UK. After the wife issued divorce proceedings, the husband was appointed to represent St Lucia at the International Maritime Organisation (IMO). She was then served with confirmation of a Saudi Talaq divorce. She applied for financial relief under the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984 Pt III.
ABSTRACT The issues were (1) whether the husband had diplomatic immunity under the Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 s.2, which incorporated the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations (VCDR) in Sch.1, and whether he was required to be active in the post to benefit from it; (2) if he had immunity, whether the extent of that immunity as set out in the International Maritime Organisation (Immunities and Privileges) Order 2002 art.15 protected him from civil action; (3) if so, whether the Part III claim was nonetheless allowable under the "real action exemption" in the VCDR art.31.
SUMMARY A husband who had obtained a diplomatic appointment with the sole aim of defeating his former wife's claim for financial relief in divorce proceedings was not protected by diplomatic immunity. Where a diplomat was not in the post or discharging the functions of the post, the policy considerations justifying immunity did not establish a proportional restriction of the implied ECHR art.6 right of access to a court.
SUMMARY 
HELD Application refused.
HELD (1) An individual was required to be discharging the functions of the diplomatic post to benefit from immunity, Empson v Smith [1966] 1 Q.B. 426 applied. A balance had evolved to protect the functionality of a mission while recognising the need to minimise abuse of diplomatic immunity and protect the implied right of access to a court in ECHR art.6. That balance underlaid the policy considerations regarding immunity and established the proportionality of the restriction in ECHR terms. If the diplomat was not in the post discharging functions, what remained was only unjustified privilege or immunity linked solely to an individual's private actions. In that case the policy considerations and proportionality of the restriction could not be justified, and could not pursue a legitimate claim sufficient to eclipse the wife's right of access to court, Al-Malki v Reyes [2015] EWCA Civ 32, [2016] 2 All E.R. 136 followed, Fogarty v United Kingdom (37112/97) [2002] I.R.L.R. 148 considered. The husband had no pre-existing connection to St Lucia, no evident knowledge or experience of maritime matters, and had not undertaken any duties of any kind since his appointment, which had coincided with the emergent relationship with his third wife. The court was satisfied that the husband had obtained a diplomatic appointment with the sole aim of defeating the wife's claims. The appointment was an entirely artificial construct. International comity could not be weighed in the balance when the post was an empty husk. The court would not accede to the husband's request to strike out the wife's Part III claim (see paras 19-20, 34-36, 40 of judgment).
HELD (2) If to the contrary the husband had acquired diplomatic immunity, the extent of the immunity was governed by the 2002 Order. Pursuant to that order and the VCDR art.31, the husband could enjoy full diplomatic immunity from civil action if he was not permanently resident in the UK, none of the VCDR exceptions applied and immunity was compatible with ECHR art.6 and art.8. Neither the 2002 Order nor the VCDR definitively defined permanent residence for that purpose and the facts surrounding it required careful evaluation. A "balance sheet" approach to the factors pointing to and against the status was not very helpful, F (A Child) (International Relocation Cases), Re [2015] EWCA Civ 882 considered. Relevant factors included that the husband was an international businessman, his limited UK visa, and that in his three marriages the family home had always been in the UK and the children brought up in the UK. The person's intention was highly relevant but not determinative, and a qualitative rather than quantitative assessment of the intention was more accurate. The most important factor was that each of the husband's family units and family homes had been based in the UK, by choice. That signalled an intention which was "unlimited in period" and therefore qualified as permanent, Gulbenkian v Gulbenkian [1937] 4 All E.R. 618 applied. He could therefore claim immunity only when exercising official functions; that did not apply to his defence to the wife's claim (paras 41-44, 50-51, 64-67).
HELD (3) Although not necessary to decide, the claim would not have met the "real action exemption" test in the VCDR art.31(1)(a). Applications for orders transferring title to property in financial disputes on the breakdown of marriages did not fall within the exception, Intpro Properties (UK) v Sauvel [1983] Q.B. 1019, Laverty v Laverty [1994] CPC (3d) 91 and De Andrade v De Andrade [1984] 118 ILR 299 applied (paras 73-74).
JUDGE Hayden J
COUNSEL For the applicant: Charles Howard QC, Tim Owen QC, Deepak Nagpal, Tom Hickman. For the respondent: Martin Pointer QC, Martin Chamberlain QC, Nicholas Wilkinson.





NAME (wl) Ferguson v John Dawson & Partners (Contractors) Ltd
CITATION Ferguson v John Dawson & Partners (Contractors) Ltd [2016] EWHC 230 (Comm)
CIT [2016] EWHC 230 (Comm)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Civil Procedure; Breach; Contempt of Court; Damage; Damages; Freezing Injunctions; Jurisdiction; Unlawful Means Conspiracy
FLAGS appeal-outstanding
ABSTRACT The second defendant (D2) applied to set aside a claim form issued by the claimant bank.
ABSTRACT The bank's claim arose in the context of long-running litigation between it and its former chairman (D1). Much of that litigation had concerned the bank's attempts to enforce a worldwide freezing order against D1. The bank established that D1 had breached the order, but when it sought his committal for contempt, he fled to France. The bank obtained judgments in default against him and began proceedings against D2, his son-in-law, the basis of the tort of conspiracy to injure by unlawful means. It claimed that D1 and D2 had conspired to prevent it from making any substantial recovery, alleging that they had breached the freezing order by creating and using false and misleading documents. It thus relied on contempt of court as the unlawful means for the purposes of the tort. Because D2 was domiciled in Switzerland, the Lugano Convention 2007 dictated that he be sued there unless the bank could establish that the instant court had jurisdiction pursuant to art.6(1) or art.5(3).
ABSTRACT The issues were whether (1) contempt of court could constitute unlawful means; (2) the court had jurisdiction to hear the bank's claim.
SUMMARY The High Court held that contempt of court could constitute "unlawful means" for the purpose of the tort of conspiracy to injure by unlawful means. It also considered the issue of jurisdiction under the Lugano Convention 2007 art.5(3) in the context of a conspiracy implemented in England to wrongfully deal with assets located abroad in breach of a worldwide freezing order.
HELD Application refused.
HELD (1) The bank relied on Surzur Overseas Ltd v Koros [1999] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 611. However, that case simply suggested, but did not decide, that breaches of a freezing order could amount to unlawful means, Surzur considered (see paras 8-10 of judgment). It was necessary to consider whether there was a positive common law rule preventing the court from awarding damages to one party following another's breach of a court order. The law of contempt was concerned with maintaining the authority of the court in the public interest. Since it was not focussed on compensating litigants who had suffered loss, principle suggested that it did not confer a power to award damages. While some authorities suggested that there was jurisdiction to award damages for contempt, none expressly decided the point and none grappled with the principle that the contempt jurisdiction was concerned with the public interest rather than private redress. Even Chapman v Honig [1963] 2 Q.B. 502, which was often referred to as having decided the issue, simply identified the opposing arguments without resolving them, Chapman considered. The observations of the House of Lords in Customs and Excise Commissioners v Barclays Bank Plc [2006] UKHL 28, [2007] 1 A.C. 181 were a very clear indication that damages could not be awarded for contempt, and the instant court had to apply them. The argument from principle was compelling: the court had no power to order damages for contempt, Hudson, Re [1966] Ch. 209 considered and Barclays Bank applied (paras 16-21, 72-77). However, that simply meant that damages could not be awarded where contempt was the only basis for the claim. Where the claim was based on a conspiracy to injure by unlawful means, namely a contempt, the contempt was not the only basis of the claim. Barclays Bank did not preclude the court from regarding a contempt as unlawful means: while a third party with knowledge of a freezing order was not liable in negligence for damages caused by his failure to obey its terms, that did not mean that a third party who conspired to breach the terms of a freezing order was not liable in the tort of conspiracy to injure by unlawful means. Moreover, the reasoning in Customs and Excise Commissioners v Total Network SL [2008] UKHL 19, [2008] 1 A.C. 1174 provided strong support for the conclusion that a contempt could amount to unlawful means, Total Network applied. Although the court in Digicel (St Lucia) Ltd v Cable & Wireless Plc [2010] EWHC 774 (Ch) had refused to extend unlawful means to non-criminal breaches of Regulations, contempts of court were sufficiently reprehensible to justify treating them as unlawful means, Digicel considered. The bank had a good arguable case that D2 had committed the tort of conspiracy to injure by unlawful means (paras 22-26).
HELD (2)(a) The bank's art.6(1) argument on jurisdiction was that when the proceedings were issued against D2, D1 was domiciled in England, which meant that D2 could be sued in England. However, at that time, D1 had abandoned England as his country of residence and hence domicile. Although he had been domiciled in England until his flight to France, he was in custody in France fighting extradition to Russia when the proceedings against D2 were issued. It was unlikely that he would return to England were he not extradited to Russia: he had fled England once, had no connections there, and was liable to arrest and detention there (paras 28-30, 33-36).
HELD (2)(b) The court did, however, have jurisdiction under art.5(3), England being the place "where the harmful event occurred". That phrase encompassed the place where the damage occurred and the place of the event giving rise to the damage, Handelswekerij GJ Bier BV and Stichtung Reinwater (The Reinwater Foundation) v Mines de Potasse d'Alsace SA (4320/74) [1979] E.C.C. 206 applied. The damage did not occur in England, because the assets were held abroad and bank's loss was the receivers' inability to realise those assets, AMT Futures Ltd v Marzillier, Dr Meier & Dr Guntner Rechtsanwaltsgesellschaft mbH [2015] EWCA Civ 143, [2015] Q.B. 699 applied (paras 38-44). However, the bank had much the better argument that England was the place of the event giving rise to the damage in respect of part of the claim. That event was the implementation, rather than the hatching,of the conspiracy, Domicrest Ltd v Swiss Bank Corp [1999] Q.B. 548 considered. Up until February 2012, the conspiracy had been implemented by instructions given by D1 in London (paras 45-54).
JUDGE Teare J
COUNSEL For the claimant: Stephen Smith QC, Tim Akkouh. For the second defendant: Charles Samek QC, Marc Delehanty.





NAME (wl) Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd
CITATION Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 1151
CIT [2005] EWCA Civ 1151
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Employment; Contribution; Employers' Liability; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Two separate employers could both be vicariously liable for the negligence of a single employee.
SUMMARY The appellant (D3) appealed against the decision that it was vicariously liable for the negligence of a fitter's mate who had caused a flood at a factory. The claimant (C) had engaged the first defendant (D1) to install air conditioning in C's factory. D1 had subcontracted ducting work to the second defendant (D2) and D2 had contracted with D3 to provide fitters and fitters' mates on a labour only basis. A fitter's mate supplied by D3, who was working with a fitter supplied by D3, both under the supervision of a fitter contracted to D2, negligently caused a flood. The judge determined that D3 and not D2 was vicariously liable for the negligence of the fitter's mate. The issue on appeal was whether both D2 and D3, rather than only one of them, could be vicariously liable for the negligence of the fitter's mate. D3 submitted that dual vicarious liability was not a legal possibility and that D2 alone should be liable. D2 submitted that D3 alone should be liable but that dual vicarious liability was a legal possibility.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) correctly formulated, the question to determine vicarious liability was who was entitled to exercise control over the relevant act or operation of the fitter's mate. To look for a transfer of a contract of employment was distracting and misleading. The fitter's mate's employment was not transferred. The inquiry should concentrate on the relevant negligent act and then ask whose responsibility it was to prevent it: who was entitled and obliged to give orders as to how the work should or should not be done. Entire and absolute control was not a necessary precondition of vicarious liability, Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd [1947] A.C. 1 and Denham v Midland Employers Mutual Assurance [1955] 2 Q.B. 437 considered. (2) On the facts of the instant case both D2's fitter and D3's fitter had been entitled, and if they had had the opportunity obliged, to prevent the mate's negligence. (3) It had been assumed since the early 19th century to be the law that where an employee who was lent by one employer to work for another was negligent, liability had to rest on one employer or the other, but not both. But the foundation on which that rested was a slender one and the contrary had never been properly argued. There was no authority binding the court to hold that dual vicarious liability was legally impossible, Donovan v Laing Wharton and Down Construction Syndicate Ltd [1893] 1 Q.B. 629 and Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Hall Russell & Co Ltd (The Esso Bernicia) [1989] A.C. 643 considered. (4) Dual vicarious liability was legally possible and both D2 and D3 were vicariously liable for the mate's negligence. (5) If the relevant relationships led to the conclusion of dual control over the employee, it was likely that the measure of control was equal. That was so in the instant case and, applying the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 , the just and equitable division of responsibility between D2 and D3 was equal. D2 and D3 should contribute 50 per cent of their several liabilities to C.
JUDGE May LJ; Rix LJ
COUNSEL For the claimant: Andrew Prynne QC, Toby Riley-Smith. For the defendants: Patrick Field QC.





NAME (wl) Hawley v Luminar Leisure Ltd
CITATION Hawley v Luminar Leisure Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 18
CIT [2006] EWCA Civ 18
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Insurance; Employment; Hospitality and Leisure; Contribution; Control; Employers' Liability; Insurance Policies; Nightclubs; Public Liability Insurance; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY A nightclub was vicariously liable for the acts of a doorman supplied to it under an agreement for the provision of security services since the club had control not only over what the doorman did but also over how he was to do it. An assault by the doorman on a member of the public caused an "accidental" bodily injury for the purposes of the employer's public liability insurance.
SUMMARY The appellants (L and F) appealed against a decision ([2005] EWHC 5, [2005] Lloyd's Rep. I.R. 275) that a doorman supplied to a nightclub was deemed to be a temporary employee of the nightclub for the purposes of vicarious liability. L operated a nightclub and contracted with a supplier (S) for the provision of security services including doormen. A doorman (W) supplied to the club under that agreement assaulted a member of the public (C) and was convicted of causing grievous bodily harm. C sued S as W's employer and L as his "temporary deemed employer". C claimed that S and L had been negligent and were liable for W's tortious act. S had gone into liquidation and C obtained judgment in default against it. S was covered by insurance issued by F but F declined to indemnify S. The judge held that L was vicariously liable because it had had sufficient control over W to make him a temporary deemed employee. He also found that C's bodily injury was "accidental" within the meaning of F's policy even though W had deliberately punched C intending to do him serious harm. He gave judgment against L and declared that F was liable to indemnify S. On L's claim against S for a contribution under the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 he assessed S's contribution at nil. He declined to consider setting aside the default judgment. L submitted that the judge had been wrong to find that W was a deemed temporary employee of L; alternatively that both L and S were vicariously liable for W's act; and that the judge had been wrong to find a nil contribution against S under the 1978 Act since S's fault was more than negligible. F submitted that S's contribution was rightly set at nil, that the default judgment should be set aside and that C's injury was not within the policy wording.
HELD dismissing the appeals, that (1) it had been open to the judge on the facts to find that L had become W's deemed employer. Vicarious liability required no fault on the part of the employer or, in the instant case, the deemed employer. The contract between S and L was for the provision of labour only. By using S's services L did not gain access to a team of trained specialists on whose skill and expertise it depended. L had no need to rely on S's staff but merely chose to do so. L exercised detailed control not only over what the doormen did but how they were to do it. Effective control of the doormen had vested in L. L had control of and responsibility for S's employees in fact and by virtue of the contractual provisions, Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd [1947] A.C. 1 applied. (2) In the circumstances it would not be appropriate to attribute vicarious liability to both S and L, since there had been effectively and substantially a transfer of control and responsibility from S to L, Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 1151, [2006] Q.B. 510 considered. (3) The lack of fault of a person vicariously liable for the wrongful act of his employee was not relevant for the purposes of determining contribution proceedings between that person and another wrongdoer, Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366 applied. It had been open to the judge to find that, as between the defendants, S's negligence had a negligible causative effect and to assess S's contribution at nil. (4) It was not appropriate or in the interests of justice to permit F to reopen the issue of the default judgment. (5) The judge had been right to hold that the question whether the injury caused to C was accidental or fortuitous had to be judged from the perspective of the assured, S, rather than that of the individual perpetrator, W, and that the injury was indeed accidental or fortuitous within the meaning of the policy. S and W were to be treated as separate from the perspective of the policy, so that the intention of W in causing the bodily injury should not be attributed to S. The judge reached the right conclusion that the cover afforded to S by the policy did extend to the liability of S to C in respect of damages for the serious bodily injury inflicted on him by W.
JUDGE Latham LJ; Neuberger LJ; Hallett LJ
COUNSEL For the claimant: John Foy QC, Daniel Lawson. For the first defendant: Derek Sweeting QC. For the third defendant: Jeremy Stuart-Smith QC, Alex Glassbrook.





NAME (wl) Biffa Waste Services Ltd v Maschinenfabrik Ernst Hese GmbH
CITATION Biffa Waste Services Ltd v Maschinenfabrik Ernst Hese GmbH [2008] EWCA Civ 1257
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 1257
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Construction Law; Construction Contracts; Duty of Care; Hazardous Pursuits; Independent Contractors; Sub-Contractors; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant contractor (O) appealed against a decision ([2008] EWHC 6 (TCC)) that it was vicariously liable for the negligence of the third party (P), which had caused or materially contributed to a fire at a recycling plant.
ABSTRACT The fire had occurred while the plant was under construction. The respondents (B) had agreed to construct the plant and had engaged another company (M) to design and build it. M had sub-contracted the fourth party (H) as main contractors, who had overall responsibility for site activities and were permanently on site. H had then entered into a contract with O to supply the "ball mill" part of the plant. O was based in Norway and had no presence at the site or in the United Kingdom generally. O designed the ball mill but sub-contracted the manufacture and installation. Welding work to the ball mill became necessary and was performed by P. O had been requested to supervise P's repairs and had agreed to pay M for the supply of supervisory labour on the relevant days. The fire had occurred during the course of P's work. B had brought proceedings against M and O to cover its losses. The trial judge, finding that P's activities were ultra-hazardous within the meaning of the principle in Honeywill & Stein Ltd v Larkin Bros (London's Commercial Photographers) Ltd [1934] 1 K.B. 191 and finding that P had been negligent, held that O was liable for P's negligence because P's welders had become O's employees while performing the welding work. He had reached that conclusion on the basis that liability attached to the party who had control over the manner in which the welding work should be done and that O, through M, had had the right to control P's operations.
ABSTRACT O submitted that the judge had failed to take account of the high burden of proof required for a finding that an employee had been transferred from his normal employer to another party, and had failed to take account of the skill of P's workers and the fact that four workers had been involved when O had contracted only for two. O maintained that M were independent contractors for whose conduct it was not responsible and that the court had focused excessively on supervision as against control, with no regard for the fact that O had had no presence on site.
SUMMARY The principle in Honeywill & Stein Ltd v Larkin Bros (London's Commercial Photographers) Ltd [1934] 1 K.B. 191 was anomalous and so unsatisfactory that its application should be kept as narrow as possible and should be truly exceptional. It was to be applied only to activities that were exceptionally dangerous whatever precautions were taken.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The court had been wrong to make a finding of vicarious liability. P's men were skilled workers and there could be no question of O exercising control over the way that they welded. There had been no express agreement to that effect and there was no basis to infer such agreement. Nor had P's workers become part of O's business; their work had been very temporary, taking place over a couple of days. The judge had also failed to address the fact that four men had been supplied instead of two. O could not be liable for employees whose work they had not contracted, but there was no basis on which to distinguish between the two for which they might be liable and the two for which they were not liable. The court had been wrong to equate supervision with control. The right to supervise did not, without more, carry with it the entitlement to instruct how to do the work, particularly in the context of skilled labour, Hawley v Luminar Leisure Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 18, [2006] I.R.L.R. 817 considered and Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 1151, [2006] Q.B. 510 distinguished on the basis that both defendants' employees had been present when the negligent act took place, whereas in the instant case, M's employees were present but O's were not. The court had also failed to acknowledge that the burden on a party seeking to show a transfer of liability for an employee was a heavy one. Exceptional facts were required for a contractor to be vicariously liable for the negligence of his sub-contractor and those facts were not present in the instant case, Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd [1947] A.C. 1, Smith v Blandford Gee Cementation Co [1970] 3 All E.R. 154 and Denham v Midland Employers Mutual Assurance [1955] 2 Q.B. 437 considered. (2) Regarding liability for ultra-hazardous acts, the principle in Honeywill was anomalous and so unsatisfactory that its application should be kept as narrow as possible and should be truly exceptional. Much in life was "inherently dangerous" unless precautions were taken and it was difficult to see what principled basis there might be for distinguishing between operations that were not inherently dangerous and those that were. It was also difficult to reconcile the principle in Honeywill with the decision in Read v J Lyons & Co Ltd [1947] A.C. 156, Read considered. Honeywill was to be applied only to activities that were exceptionally dangerous whatever precautions were taken, Honeywill distinguished. Caution was required when considering cases that were relied upon by the Court of Appeal in Honeywill.
JUDGE Sir Anthony May PQBD; Rimer LJ; Stanley Burnton LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: David Allen QC. For the respondents: Ben Patten.





NAME (wl) JGE v English Province of Our Lady of Charity
CITATION JGE v English Province of Our Lady of Charity [2012] EWCA Civ 938
CIT [2012] EWCA Civ 938
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Ecclesiastical Law; Personal Injury; Child Sexual Abuse; Employees; Ministers of Religion; Personal Injury; Roman Catholic Church; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant Roman Catholic diocese (D) appealed against a decision ([2011] EWHC 2871 (QB), [2012] 2 W.L.R.709) that it could be vicariously liable for the alleged torts of one of its parish priests (B).
ABSTRACT The court below had reached the decision in determination of a preliminary issue relating to a claim for damages for personal injury by the respondent (J) against D. J alleged that she had been sexually abused and raped by B. The judge below acknowledged that vicarious liability involved the synthesis of two elements, the first stage being the relationship between the employer and the employee and the second being whether the act was within the scope of the employment. In relation to the first stage, it was accepted that a priest was not an employee, but that vicarious liability could be founded on a relationship other than employment. On the basis of the decision in Doe v Bennett [2004] 1 S.C.R. 436, the judge concluded that the relationship was akin to employment because of the close connection between the tortfeasor and the person against whom liability was sought. The issue was whether the law could be extended to relationships akin to employment; whether the close connection test was appropriate; and whether it was enough that the result was just and fair.
SUMMARY The relationship between a Roman Catholic parish priest and a bishop was sufficiently close in character to that of employee and employer to make it just and fair to hold a diocese vicariously liable for the wrongful acts of one of its priests.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (Tomlinson L.J. dissenting) The law of vicarious liability had moved beyond the confines of a contract of service. However, it was wrong to conclude that the relationship between the tortfeasor and the person against whom liability was sought had to be sufficiently close. If there was a close connection test, it was that the relationship between the defendant and the tortfeasor had to be so close to a relationship of employer and employee that for vicarious liability purposes it could fairly be said to be akin to employment, Doe v Bennett considered. The test was whether the relationship of the bishop and B was so close in character to one of employer and employee that it was just and fair to hold the employer vicariously liable (see paras 61-63 of judgment). Applying the control test, a priest was subject to no direct control in the sense of the bishop checking what he did every single day, but there was a level of control in the sense that if certain things did not happen then action could be taken. Moreover, under canon law, priests were bound by special obligation to show reverence and obedience to their ordinary. Abuse of a child was a gross breach of ecclesiastical law and if it came to the bishop's knowledge, he would be bound to dismiss the priest from his office. A priest also operated within a pre-existing framework of rights and obligations set out in the Code of Canon Law and was ultimately subject to the sanctions and control of his bishop to whom he was accountable, Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 1151, [2006] Q.B. 510 applied, Bazley v Curry (1999) 174 D.L.R. (4th) 45 considered (paras 74-76). The problem in relation to the organisation test was in identifying the employer's business. However, the Roman Catholic Church looked like a business and operated like one. The Pope was in the head office; there were "regional offices" with appointed bishops; and the "local branches" were parishes with their appointed priests (para.77). In relation to the integration test, the role of the parish priest was wholly integrated into the organisational structure of the Church's enterprise. He was part and parcel of the organisation, not only accessory to it, Viasystems and Stevenson Jordan & Harrison v MacDonald & Evans [1952] 1 T.L.R. 101 applied (para.78). The question in relation to the entrepreneur test was whether the priest was more like an independent contractor than an employee. He was not paid a salary directly, but was dependent on what he could take from collections given at Mass. However, any surplus formed part of the parish funds. His situation was akin to being paid a wage and certainly did not resonate with being an entrepreneur (para.79). B did not match every facet of being an employee, but the result of each test led to the conclusion that he was more like an employee than an independent contractor. The relationship was akin to employment within the meaning which an ordinary person would give the words, Cassidy v Ministry of Health [1951] 2 K.B. 343 applied. He was in a relationship with his bishop which was close enough and sufficiently akin to that of employer and employee to make it just and fair to impose vicarious liability. Justice and fairness was used as a salutary check on the conclusion, but was not a stand-alone test (paras 80-84).
JUDGE Ward LJ; Tomlinson LJ; Davis LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Lord Faulks QC, Nicholas Fewtrell. For the respondent: Elizabeth-Anne Gumbel QC, Justin Levinson.





NAME (wl) Various Claimants v Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools
CITATION Various Claimants v Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools [2012] UKSC 56
CIT [2012] UKSC 56
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Child Sexual Abuse; Denominational Schools; Religious Groups; Unincorporated Associations; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (C) appealed against a decision ([2010] EWCA Civ 1106) that the respondent Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools (the Institute) was not vicariously liable for alleged physical and sexual abuse perpetrated by brother teachers at a residential school for boys in need of care between 1958 and 1992.
ABSTRACT C represented the various boards of managers which had carried out the day-to-day management of the school from 1973 until its closure in 1994. The Institute was an unincorporated association of lay brothers of the Catholic Church. For the purposes of administration, the Institute was divided into districts called Provinces, each headed by a "Provincial". At all material times, the headteacher and some other teachers at the school were supplied by the Institute. The alleged abusers included Institute brothers as well as non-Institute members of staff. C had been held to be vicariously liable for acts of abuse by the brother teachers. It now sought to challenge the finding that the Institute was not also vicariously liable.
SUMMARY Vicarious liability attached to the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools, a religious order, in respect of sexual abuse perpetrated or allegedly perpetrated by brother teachers at a residential school for boys, even though the Institute had not managed the school.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD Vicarious liability involved a two-stage test. First, it was necessary to consider the relationship between the defendant and the tortfeasor to see whether it was one that was capable of giving rise to vicarious liability. Second, regard should be had to the connection that linked the relationship between the defendant and the tortfeasor and the act or omission of the latter. The relationship between the teaching brothers and the Institute was sufficiently akin to that of employer and employees to satisfy the first stage of the test: the Institute was subdivided into a hierarchical structure and conducted its activities as if it were a corporate body; the teaching activity of the brothers was undertaken because the Provincial directed them to undertake it; although the brothers entered into contracts of employment with those managing the school, they did so because the Provincial required them to do so; the teaching activity undertaken by the brothers was in furtherance of the objective, or mission, of the Institute; further, the manner in which the brother teachers were obliged to conduct themselves as teachers was dictated by the Institute's rules (see paras 21, 56, 60 of judgment). As to the second stage of the test, the precise criteria for imposing vicarious liability for sexual abuse were still in the course of refinement by judicial decision, but a common theme arose from the authorities. Vicarious liability was imposed where a defendant, whose relationship with the abuser put it in a position to use the abuser to carry on its business or to further its own interests, had done so in a manner which had created or significantly enhanced the risk that the victim or victims would suffer the relevant abuse. The essential closeness of connection between the relationship between the defendant and the tortfeasor and the acts of abuse thus involved a strong causative link. Those were the criteria that established the necessary "close connection" between relationship and abuse. It was not right to say that creation of risk was simply a policy consideration and not one of the criteria. It was not enough, of itself, to give rise to vicarious liability for abuse but it was always likely to be an important element in the facts that gave rise to such liability. Here, both the necessary relationship between the brothers and the Institute and the close connection between that relationship and the abuse committed at the school had been made out. As to the former, the relationship between the Institute and the brothers enabled the Institute to place the brothers in teaching positions and, in particular, in the position of headmaster at the school. The standing that the brothers enjoyed as members of the Institute led the managers of that school to comply with the decisions of the Institute as to who should fill that key position. It was particularly significant that the Institute provided the headmasters, for the running of the school was largely carried out by the headmasters. The brother headmaster was almost always the Director of the Institute's community, living on the school premises. There was thus a very close connection between the relationship between the brothers and the Institute and the employment of the brothers as teachers in the school. There was also a very close connection between the brother teachers' employment in the school and the sexual abuse that they committed or must be assumed to have committed. There was no Criminal Records Bureau at the time, but the risk of sexual abuse was recognised, as demonstrated by the prohibition in the Institute's rules on touching children. The placement of brother teachers at the school, a residential school in the precincts of which they also resided, greatly enhanced the risk of abuse by them if they had a propensity for such misconduct (paras 85-88, 91, 93).
JUDGE Lord Phillips JSC; Lady Hale JSC; Lord Kerr JSC; Lord Wilson JSC; Lord Carnwath JSC
COUNSEL For the appellant: George Leggatt QC, Nicholas Fewtrell. For the respondent: Lord Faulks QC, Alastair Hammerton.





NAME (wl) Cox v Ministry of Justice
CITATION Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] UKSC 10
CIT [2016] UKSC 10
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Employers' Liability; Ministry of Justice; Prisoners; Prison Service; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The Ministry of Justice appealed against a decision ([2014] EWCA Civ 132, [2015] Q.B. 107) that it was vicariously liable for injury caused to the respondent (C) by the negligent act of a prisoner undertaking paid kitchen work.
ABSTRACT C had been a catering manager at a prison. Prisons were required by statute to ensure that prisoners did useful work. The prisoner responsible for the injury had earned a nominal wage. The Court of Appeal, applying the criteria listed in Various Claimants v Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools [2012] UKSC 56, [2013] 2 A.C. 1 ( Christian Brothers ) for imposing vicarious liability where a relationship was other than one of employment, held the Prison Service, and therefore the ministry, vicariously liable.
ABSTRACT The ministry argued that the relationship between the Prison Service and prisoners was fundamentally different from an employer/employee relationship in that the Prison Service's primary purpose was not a business or profit, but prisoners' rehabilitation, and prisoners had no interest in furthering the Prison Service's objectives; it was always necessary to ask whether it would be fair, just and reasonable to impose vicarious liability; and there was a risk of further claims arising should vicarious liability be imposed.
SUMMARY The Supreme Court considered the approach to be adopted in deciding whether a relationship other than one of employment can give rise to vicarious liability, in a judgment complementary to its judgment in Mohamud v Wm Morrison Supermarkets Plc [2016] UKSC 11, [2016] 2 W.L.R. 821. The Ministry of Justice was vicariously liable for injury caused by a negligent act of a prisoner undertaking paid kitchen work.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The Christian Brothers approach extended the scope of vicarious liability beyond an employer's responsibility for the acts of its employees, but did not impose liability where a tortfeasor's activities were entirely attributable to an independent business. The defendant did not have to carry on commercial activities, nor did it need to derive a profit from the tortfeasor's activities. It was sufficient that there was a defendant carrying on activities in furtherance of its own interests. Defendants could not avoid liability by technical arguments about the employment status of the tortfeasor, Christian Brothers explained, Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 1151, [2006] Q.B. 510 and E v English Province of Our Lady of Charity [2012] EWCA Civ 938, [2013] Q.B. 722 applied (see paras 29-31 of judgment).
HELD (2) The Christian Brothers requirements were met and the ministry was vicariously liable, Christian Brothers applied. The Prison Service carried on activities in furtherance of its aims. The fact that the aims were not commercially motivated, but served the public interest, was no bar to imposing vicarious liability. Prisoners working in the kitchens were integrated into the operation of the prison, so that the activities assigned to them by the Prison Service formed an integral part of the activities it carried on, in particular the activity of providing meals for prisoners. The prisoners were placed in a position where there was a risk that they could commit a variety of negligent acts within the field of activities assigned to them. Further, they worked under the direction of prison staff. C had been injured as a result of negligence by the prisoner in carrying on the activities assigned to him (para.32). The fact that setting prisoners to work was one means by which the Prison Service sought to rehabilitate prisoners did not alter that conclusion. Rehabilitation was not the only objective: the Prison Service also intended that prisoners should contribute to the cost of their upkeep by providing services. The prisoners' activities formed part of the operation of the prison and were of benefit to the Prison Service itself. It was not essential to the imposition of vicarious liability that the defendant should seek to make a profit. Nor did it depend on alignment of the objectives of the defendant and the tortfeasor. The fact that prisoners were required to serve part of their sentence in prison and to undertake work there for nominal wages, bound them into a closer relationship with the Prison Service than would be the case for an employee. The fact that payments were below commercial level reflected the context in which prisoners worked, but did not mean that vicarious liability should not be imposed. Payment of a wage was not essential, Christian Brothers applied. The fact that prison operators were under a statutory duty to provide prisoners with useful work was not incompatible with vicarious liability. The Christian Brothers criteria were designed to ensure that vicarious liability was imposed where it was fair, just and reasonable to do so; where the criteria were satisfied, it would not generally be necessary to reassess the fairness of the result. However, where a case concerned circumstances which had not previously been the subject of authoritative judicial decision, it could be valuable to consider fairness. The instant appeal was such a case; however, for the Prison Service to be liable to compensate for negligence by the prison catering team appeared just and reasonable whether the tortfeasor was a civilian or a prisoner. The court rejected arguments based on the risk of further claims being brought (paras 34-45).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Dyson JSC; Lord Reed JSC; Lord Toulson JSC
COUNSEL For the appellant: James Eadie QC, Kate Grange, Stephen Kosmin. For the respondent: Robert Weir QC, Robert O'Leary.





NAME (wl) Smith v Stages
CITATION Smith v Stages [1989] AC 928
CIT [1989] AC 928
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Employers' Liability; Employment; Personal Injury; Transport
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Vicarious liability; course of employment; travel
SUMMARY An employee who is paid for travelling from his residence to the site of work is not taken outside the course of his employment by virtue of having a discretion as to mode of travel. S and M were instructed by their employer to do a week's work in a distant part of the country. They were paid travelling expenses, and for travelling time. The job finished early on a Monday morning, and they were paid for sleeping time, being expected to report for work on the Wednesday morning. In fact they set off on the return journey immediately in S's car, and were later involved in a collision in which M suffered serious injury. M, and later his widow, sued S, and the employer on the basis that S and M were acting within the course of their employment on the return journey.
HELD that they were acting in the course of their employment, and accordingly the employer was liable for S's negligence ( St Helens Colliery Co Ltd v Hewitson [1924] A.C. 59 applied. In determining whether an employee was acting in the course of his employment when travelling on the highway the material question was whether he was going about his employer's business at the material time. The following general propositions for journeys to and from work were put forward by the court: (1) When an employee was travelling between his ordinary residence and work by any means of transport whether or not provided by his employer he was not acting in the course of his employment unless contractually obliged to do so. (2) Travelling between workplaces was in the course of employment. (3) When an employee was paid for travelling in his employer's time the fact that the employee could choose the time and mode of transport did not take the journey out of the course of his employment. (4) When an employee was travelling from his ordinary residence to an unusual place of work or to an emergency the employee would be acting in the course of his employment. (5) A deviation or interruption of a journey would for that time take an employee out of the course of his employment.
JUDGE Lord Keith of Kinkel; Lord Brandon of Oakbrook; Lord Griffiths; Lord Goff of Chieveley; Lord Lowry





NAME (wl) Lister v Hesley Hall
CITATION Lister v Hesley Hall [2001] UKHL 22
CIT [2001] UKHL 22
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Employers' Liability; Negligence; Residential Care; Sexual Abuse; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY A warden's tortious acts in sexually abusing children in his care were so closely connected with his employment as to warrant the imposition of vicarious liability on his employer, T v North Yorkshire CC [1999] I.R.L.R. 98 overruled.
SUMMARY T, who had been subjected to sexual abuse by D, the warden of a residential home, appealed against a decision (Times, October 13, 1999) that the owner of the home, HH, was not vicariously liable for the tortious acts of D, its employee and the home's warden, in sexually abusing children in his care. The matter had proceeded before the Court of Appeal, upon the basis that HH was liable for D's failure to report the risk of or actual harm caused to the children since, bound by the decision in T v North Yorkshire CC [1999] I.R.L.R. 98 , it had not been open to the court to consider whether HH had been vicariously liable for the actual abuse. T challenged the validity of the decision in T v North Yorkshire CC submitting that employers might be vicariously liable for the sexual torts of an employee even though the sexual abuse could not be considered as an unauthorised mode of carrying out an authorised act.
HELD allowing the appeal, that the line of authority relating to vicarious liability for intentional torts as exemplified by Morris v CW Martin & Sons Ltd [1966] 1 Q.B. 716 was of general application and was not restricted to bailment cases, T v North Yorkshire CC overruled. When applying the test laid down in Salmond and Heutson on Torts, 21st edition (1996) p.443 in respect of whether a wrongful act was outside the scope of employment, the Court of Appeal in T v North Yorkshire CC had wrongly categorised the sexual assaults which took place as far removed from an unauthorised mode of carrying out a teacher's duty and failed to acknowledge the close connection between the employment and the tort, Bazley v Curry (1999) 174 D.L.R. (4th) 45 and Jacobi v Griffiths (1999) 174 D.L.R. (4th) 71 considered. In applying the Salmond test it was crucial to focus on the right act of the employee and its connection with the tortious act Rose v Plenty [1976] 1 W.L.R. 141 considered. The court must not simply consider whether the acts of sexual abuse were modes of doing an authorised act but must also consider whether there existed a close connection between the tort and the employee's duties. In the instant case, HH had undertaken to care for the resident children and had entrusted that obligation to D. D's torts were so closely connected with his employment that it would be fair and just to hold HH vicariously liable.
JUDGE Lord Steyn; Lord Clyde; Lord Hutton; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough; Lord Millett
COUNSEL For L: Richard Maxwell Q.C. and Rosalind Coe. For H: Andrew Collender Q.C. and Andrew Miller.





NAME (wl) Bernard v Attorney General of Jamaica
CITATION Bernard v Attorney General of Jamaica [2004] UKPC 47
CIT [2004] UKPC 47
COURT UKPC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Police; Employment; Jamaica; Police Officers; Risk; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY In determining whether the Attorney General of Jamaica was vicariously liable for the conduct of a police constable, a relevant factor was the risks to others created by an employer who entrusted duties, tasks and functions to an employee.
SUMMARY The appellant (B) appealed against a decision of the Court of Appeal of Jamaica that the Attorney General was not vicariously liable for the unlawful shooting of B by a police officer. B had been using a public telephone when an off duty officer announced "police" and demanded the phone. When B refused the officer shot him. The Attorney General denied that the officer was acting in the course of his employment or for his employer's benefit. B submitted that the contrary was true as a police officer was duty bound to preserve the peace on behalf of his employer at all times, that he had asserted his authority as a police officer and it did not matter whether he had done so in furtherance of his duty as a police officer. Furthermore, the officer had shot B using a revolver that his employer had given him and which he was permitted to carry when off duty, and the officer had subsequently arrested B and charged him with an offence, thereby asserting that at the time of the offence he was acting in the execution of his duty as a police officer.
HELD allowing the appeal, that an employer could be vicariously liable notwithstanding that the employee was acting exclusively for his or her own benefit. It was necessary to consider whether the unlawful shooting was so closely connected with the officer's employment that it would be fair and just to hold the Attorney General vicariously liable, Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215 applied and Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366 applied. It was of prime importance that the shooting followed immediately upon the announcement by the officer that he was a policeman, which was probably calculated to create the impression that he was acting on police business. The subsequent arrest of B showed that the officer considered that B had interfered with the execution of his duties as a police officer. Moreover, the creation of the risk inherent in giving the officer a revolver for use at home reinforced the conclusion that vicarious liability was established.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Steyn; Lord Millett; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Carswell
COUNSEL For the appellant: Lord Gifford QC, Clare Gordon. For the respondent: Michael Hylton QC, Curtis Cochrane (Jamaica Bar).





NAME (wl) Ministry of Defence v Radclyffe
CITATION Ministry of Defence v Radclyffe [2009] EWCA Civ 635
CIT [2009] EWCA Civ 635
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Armed Forces; Employment; Army; Assumption of Responsibility; Causation; Contributory Negligence; Duty of Care; Employers' Liability; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant Ministry of Defence appealed against a decision that it was vicariously liable for the negligence of an army captain (J) which resulted in the respondent (R) suffering personal injury.
ABSTRACT R was a second lieutenant. His unit had spent three months in Iraq. He then went with a group of men on an adventure training exercise in Germany. J was in charge of the group. On a day when there was no adventure training members of the group went to a lake to swim. J allowed a number of soldiers to jump into the lake from a bridge. The height of the jump was about 20 metres. J indicated that he and R should also jump and they did. The following day R and others went swimming in the lake again. R allowed two soldiers to make the jump from the bridge. R went first but was badly and permanently injured after he entered the water with his legs bent. R's case was that J was negligent in giving permission for or encouraging the men to jump and that the jump in which R was injured followed from and was caused by what J had said and done on the previous day. The MOD's case was that R was off duty at the material times; what J did on the previous day was outside the course of his employment; no duty of care was owed to R who acted of his own volition and at his own risk. The judge held that J had been acting in the course of his employment; he owed the men under his command including R a duty of care; J was negligent in giving permission to jump; R would not have jumped and been injured if J had not given permission to the men and indicated that R should jump on the previous day; R's contributory negligence was assessed at 40 per cent.
SUMMARY The Ministry of Defence was vicariously liable for the negligence of an army captain who owed a duty of care to junior officers and men in an off duty situation and whose breach of duty resulted in a second lieutenant suffering personal injury.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) Although the officers and men were off duty at the lake, rank and military discipline remained relevant. J could not order the men to jump but he could order them not to jump. The swimming trips between organised adventure training were obviously and on the evidence subject to military discipline. (2) J owed R and the soldiers a duty of care when they were at the lake. He was the officer in charge of them in Germany, and in the context of the swimming party it was fair, just and reasonable to ascribe to him a duty to take reasonable care to guard his subordinates against the foreseeable risk of injury, if they jumped from the bridge into the lake. By his own presence there in the circumstances that pertained and by reason of his rank, he assumed responsibility to prevent them from taking undue risks of which he was or ought to have been aware. The soldiers asked him if they might jump. That predicated reliance sufficient for a duty of care. The MOD was not the occupier of the lake, Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2003] UKHL 47, [2004] 1 A.C. 46 distinguished. The relationship between MOD and R was that of employer and employee and the MOD, through J, assumed responsibility for R's safety, Poppleton v Trustees of the Portsmouth Youth Activities Committee [2008] EWCA Civ 646, [2009] P.I.Q.R. P1 considered. (3) The fact that J owed R and the men a duty of care indicated that he was acting in the course of his employment and that the MOD was vicariously liable for his breach of duty. J's job included taking charge of junior officers and men and taking reasonable care for their safety. That extended to doing so on off duty occasions, such as the swimming party, to which the military relationship extended. There was a sufficient connection between J's employment as an army officer and his breach of duty, Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215 followed. (4) J was in breach of his duty of care. It was obviously dangerous to jump from the bridge. He should not have encouraged R to jump but should have ordered him and his men not to do so. (5) The judge was entitled to find that R's decision to jump was causatively influenced by the pressure deriving from what J had said and done on the previous day. (6) The judge was entitled to assess R's contributory negligence at 40 per cent.
JUDGE Sir Anthony May PQBD; Hooper LJ; Sullivan LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Tania Griffiths QC. For the respondent: Nicholas Braslavsky QC, Michael Rawlinson QC.





NAME (wl) Maga v Birmingham Roman Catholic Archdiocese Trustees
CITATION Maga v Birmingham Roman Catholic Archdiocese Trustees [2010] EWCA Civ 256
CIT [2010] EWCA Civ 256
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Child Sexual Abuse; Clergy; Duty of Care; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (M) appealed against a decision ([2009] EWHC 780 (QB)) dismissing his claim against the respondent archdiocese for damages for sexual abuse to which he claimed to have been subjected when he was 12 or 13. The archdiocese cross-appealed.
ABSTRACT The judge had found that M had been sexually abused on many occasions by a Catholic priest (C); that his relationship with C had started while he was admiring C's car; that C had invited him to attend the church disco, which he did on a number of occasions; that the discos were open to all young people in the area, whether or not they were Roman Catholics (M was not); that C had paid him for cleaning his car and doing small jobs in the presbytery; that C had not involved him in the activities of the church itself but instead had cultivated him for the purpose of sexual abuse; and that most of the abuse had occurred in the presbytery. The judge concluded, however, that the archdiocese was not vicariously liable for the sexual abuse perpetrated by C.
ABSTRACT M argued that, irrespective of whether the archdiocese had acted in a blameworthy way, it was responsible for the wrongful acts complained of.
SUMMARY A priest's sexual abuse of the claimant had been so closely connected with his employment as a priest that it would be fair and just to hold the archdiocese which had employed him vicariously liable for that abuse.
HELD Appeal allowed, cross-appeal dismissed.
HELD There were a number of factors which, taken together, showed that there was a sufficiently close connection between C's employment as priest at the church and the abuse which he had inflicted on M to render it fair and just to impose vicarious liability for the abuse on his employer, namely the archdiocese, Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215 applied. First, C was normally dressed in clerical garb and was so dressed when he first met M. At the very least, that factor set the scene. A priest had a special role, which involved trust and responsibility in a more general way even than a teacher, a doctor or a nurse. It was C's employment as a priest by the archdiocese which enabled him, indeed was intended to enable him, to hold himself out as having such a role and such authority. Second, C's functions as a priest included a duty to evangelise or to bring the gospel to other people. Accordingly, he was ostensibly performing his duty as a priest employed by the archdiocese by getting to know M. Third, given that M was aged 12 or 13 when his association with C started, it was significant that C was given a special responsibility for youth work at the church. It underlined the point that, when getting to know and effectively "grooming" M, C was ostensibly carrying out one of his specifically assigned functions in the church. Fourth, C was able to develop his relationship with M by inviting him to a disco which was on church premises and which he organised as a priest at the church. Thus, M had been drawn into the relationship through the medium of a church-organised function carried on in church premises by C, a priest at the church. Fifth, the relationship was further developed when C got M to clear up after discos. That work, on church premises at the request of a priest at the church, led M to do other work for C. Thus, C's role as priest in the archdiocese gave him the status and opportunity to draw M further into his sexually abusive orbit by ostensibly respectable means connected with his employment as a priest at the church. Sixth, the fact that M was working at the request of a priest on premises, namely the presbytery, owned by the priest's archdiocese, adjoining the church where the priest worked, and which were lived in by the priest, was relevant to the issue of vicarious liability for the first three reasons mentioned above, namely moral authority, evangelisation and youth work. Seventh, the opportunity to spend time alone with M, especially in the presbytery, had arisen from C's role as a priest employed as such by the archdiocese, Jacobi v Griffiths (1999) 174 D.L.R. (4th) 71 and Bazley v Curry (1999) 174 D.L.R. (4th) 45 considered.
JUDGE Lord Neuberger MR; Longmore LJ; Smith LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Elizabeth-Anne Gumbel QC, Justin Levinson. For the respondent: Edward Faulks QC, Nicholas Fewtrell.





NAME (wl) Allen v Chief Constable of Hampshire
CITATION Allen v Chief Constable of Hampshire [2013] EWCA Civ 967
CIT [2013] EWCA Civ 967
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Police; Harassment; Police Officers; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant (C) appealed against a decision striking out her claim against the respondent chief constable for torts alleged to have been carried out by a serving police officer (R).
ABSTRACT C alleged that after she commenced a relationship with another police officer, R had begun a campaign of harassment against her. The alleged complaints included the receipt of abusive anonymous letters, telephone calls made by R suggesting C move out of the area, an arson attack on C's home and criminal damage to her car. C reported the arson and R's alleged involvement and a criminal investigation was referred to the CPS, who ultimately decided not to prosecute R. Further, a disciplinary investigation against R was discontinued upon the basis of no evidence to support misconduct. C claimed that the chief constable was vicariously liable for the acts of R by virtue of the Police Act 1996 s.88 and that the inadequate investigation into R's wrongdoing breached the State's investigative duties under the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.3. C's claim was struck out on both grounds.
SUMMARY A chief constable was not vicariously liable for the alleged tortious acts of a police officer as the facts did not reveal any, let alone a close, connection between the alleged acts and the tortfeasor's position as a police officer.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) C's claim for vicarious liability had no realistic prospect of success and the court below was right to strike it out. The criteria to be satisfied for establishing vicarious liability involved a two-stage approach. First, there must be a relationship between the individual tortfeasor and the party said to be vicariously liable capable of triggering the doctrine. Second, the tort committed must be sufficiently connected with that relationship, Various Claimants v Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools [2012] UKSC 56, [2013] 2 A.C. 1 applied. It was common ground that R was a serving police officer of the chief constable's constabulary and that relationship was therefore capable of giving rise to vicarious liability. The first stage of the criteria was therefore satisfied. It was also true that claims asserting vicarious liability were fact sensitive and, in general, might not lend themselves to determination at a preliminary stage. It did not follow however that in all cases where vicarious liability was alleged a strike out might not be appropriate. In respect of the second stage of the criteria, taken at their highest, the pleaded facts did not reveal any, let alone a close, connection between the acts alleged and R's position as a police officer. Given that the letters were anonymous they self evidently could not have purported to have come from a police officer. With regard to the telephone calls, the allegations in no way established that R was acting or was purporting to act as a police officer and accordingly they did not begin to establish a sufficient connection. Again, in relation to the acts of arson and criminal damage, even assuming that R was responsible, whether solely or with others, there was nothing whatsoever to connect those acts with the purported performance of police duties or functions. Were the issue to go to trial, there was therefore no realistic prospect of C making good the second stage of the criteria or bringing the claim within s.88. C's claim, if proved, revealed R pursuing a personal vendetta or frolic of her own and that plainly would not do for the purposes of establishing vicarious liability, Weir v Bettison [2003] EWCA Civ 111, [2003] I.C.R. 708 and N v Chief Constable of Merseyside [2006] EWHC 3041 (QB), [2006] Po. L.R. 160 considered (see paras 28-35 of judgment). (2) Article 3 gave rise to an obligation on the part of the State to conduct an effective investigation into allegations that treatment amounted to violation of a person's rights. The scope of those obligations would differ greatly depending on whether the violation was inflicted by agents of the State or, at the other end of the scale, private individuals, as in the instant case. A criminal investigation and disciplinary proceedings had been taken against R; the outcome of those was irrelevant for present purposes. The chief constable's investigative obligations had been satisfied by the legal mechanisms available to C and the court below had been right to strike out C's claim based upon art.3 (paras 47-54).
JUDGE Lord Dyson MR; Gross LJ; Ryder LJ
COUNSEL For the appellants: Karon Monaghan QC, Helen Law. For the respondent: Samantha Leek QC, Cicely Hayward.





NAME (wl) Mohamud v WM Morrison Supermarkets Plc
CITATION Mohamud v WM Morrison Supermarkets Plc [2016] UKSC 11
CIT [2016] UKSC 11
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Employment; Assault; Employers' Liability; Shops; Vicarious Liability
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT A supermarket customer appealed against a decision ([2014] EWCA Civ 116) that the respondent supermarket was not vicariously liable for an assault perpetrated by one of its employees.
ABSTRACT The customer had attended a petrol station kiosk run by the supermarket and had approached one of the staff members (K) with an enquiry. K, whose job was to serve customers and see that the petrol pumps and kiosk were kept in good running order, responded with foul-mouthed abuse and ordered the customer to leave. He then followed him onto the forecourt where he told him to keep away and subjected him to a violent and unprovoked assault. The customer brought proceedings against the supermarket, claiming that it was vicariously liable for the assault. The trial judge held that it was not liable because there was no sufficiently close connection between the assault and what K was employed to do. The Court of Appeal upheld his decision, finding that while K's employment involved interaction with customers, that was insufficient to fix the supermarket with vicarious liability for his violence: his duties did not involve him being placed in situations where there was a clear possibility of confrontation.
ABSTRACT The customer submitted that there should be a new test of vicarious liability in which the courts applied a "representative capacity" rather than a "close connection" test. He argued that the question should be whether a reasonable observer would consider the employee to be acting in the capacity of a representative of the employer at the time of committing the tort.
SUMMARY There was nothing wrong with the "close connection" test of vicarious liability adumbrated in Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215 and the law would not be improved by a change of vocabulary. Applying that test, the employer of a petrol kiosk attendant who had subjected a customer to an unprovoked assault was liable for his actions.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) After reviewing the development of the doctrine of vicarious liability, the court indicated that the "close connection" test adumbrated in Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215 and Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366 had been followed in a line of cases, including several at the highest level. There was a risk in attempting to lay down criteria for determining what precisely amounted to a sufficiently close connection to make it just for an employer to be held vicariously liable. A simplification of the essence was more desirable, and in its simplest terms, two matters had to be considered: (a) what functions had been entrusted by the employer to the employee (which had to be addressed broadly); and (b) whether there was sufficient connection between the employee's wrongful conduct and the position in which he was employed to make it right for the employer to be fixed with vicarious liability. The cases in which the necessary connection had been found to exist were those in which the employee had used or misused his position in a way which injured the third party, Lloyd v Grace Smith & Co [1912] A.C. 716, Pettersson v Royal Oak Hotel [1948] N.Z.L.R. 136 and Warren v Henlys Ltd [1948] 2 All E.R. 935 considered. There was nothing wrong with the close connection test as such and the law would not be improved by a change of vocabulary, Lister and Dubai Aluminium followed (see paras 42- 46 of judgment). The test should only be abrogated or refined if a demonstrably better test could be devised. However, the proposed "representative capacity" test was hopelessly vague. Moreover, while the instant court had suggested in Various Claimants v Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools [2012] UKSC 56, [2013] 2 A.C. 1 that the law of vicarious liability was on the move, such change was a response to changes in the legal relationships between enterprises and members of their workforces, Christian Brothers referred to. There had been no changes in societal conditions requiring a change in the law governing the circumstances in which an employer should be held vicariously liable for the torts of an employee (paras 53-55).
HELD (2) It was K's job to attend to customers and respond to their inquiries. His conduct in answering the claimant's request in a foul-mouthed way and ordering him to leave was inexcusable but was within the field of activities assigned to him. What happened thereafter was an unbroken sequence of events. It was not right to regard K as having metaphorically taken off his uniform when he followed the customer onto the forecourt. Moreover, once on the forecourt, K had repeated his order to leave. That was not something personal between him and the customer; he was ordering him to keep away from his employer's premises, and he reinforced that order by violence. In doing so he was purporting to act in the furtherance of his employer's business. While it was a gross abuse of his position, it was in connection with the business in which he was employed. Since the supermarket had entrusted him with the position of serving customers it was just that it should be held responsible for his abuse of that position. Finally, it was irrelevant that it looked as if K was motivated by personal racism rather than a desire to benefit his employer's business (paras 47-49, 57).
HELD (3) Although the claims and issues in the instant case were separate from those in Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] UKSC 10, [2016] 2 W.L.R. 806, that and the instant judgment were intended to be complementary in their legal analysis. The instant court agreed with the reasoning and conclusion of Lord Reed in that case (para.1).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Dyson JSC; Lord Reed JSC; Lord Toulson JSC
COUNSEL For the appellant: Joel Donovan QC, Adam Ohringer. For the respondent: Benjamin Browne QC, Roger Harris, Isabel Barter.





NAME (wl) Wheat v Lacon and Co Ltd
CITATION Wheat v Lacon and Co Ltd [2016] UKSC 13
CIT [2016] UKSC 13
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Tax; Employment-Related Securities; Income Tax; Purposive Interpretation; Ramsay Principle; Restricted Shares; Tax Avoidance
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT HMRC appealed against a decision ([2014] EWCA Civ 452, [2014] S.T.C. 2278) that tax avoidance schemes set up by the respondent banks (UBS and DB) in order to award tax-free bonuses to employees were effective.
ABSTRACT The schemes sought to avoid their employees' income tax liability by taking advantage of the Income Tax (Earnings and Pensions) Act 2003 Pt 7 Ch.2. The banks had used the amount of the employees' bonuses to pay for redeemable shares in an offshore company set up solely for the purpose of the scheme. The shares were awarded to the employees in place of the bonuses. Conditions were attached to the shares which were intended to make them "restricted securities" within s.423(1) and so to enable them to benefit from the exemption from income tax under s.425(2). The restrictions involved a contingency which was unlikely to occur but which might conceivably do so. UBS provided that the shares in its scheme would immediately be sold if the FTSE 100 share index exceeded a certain level within a three-week period. DB provided that the shares would be forfeited if the employee's employment was terminated within a certain period. Once the exemptions accrued, the restrictions were removed and the shares were redeemable by the employees for cash.
ABSTRACT The issue was whether the Act should be interpreted purposively and the Ramsay principle should be applied so as to disregard the conditions for the purpose of deciding whether the shares were restricted securities.
SUMMARY Where the Income Tax (Earnings and Pensions) Act 2003 s.423(1), which defined which employment-related securities were "restricted securities" attracting an exemption from income tax on acquisition, referred to "any contract, agreement, arrangement or condition which makes provision to which any of subsections (2) to (4) applies", that was to be construed as being limited to provision having a business or commercial purpose, and not to commercially irrelevant conditions whose only purpose was the obtaining of the exemption.
HELD Appeals allowed.
HELD (1) Part 7 of the Act was concerned with issues arising when employees were remunerated in shares and other securities. Its purposes were (a) to promote employee share ownership, particularly by encouraging share incentive schemes; (b) since such schemes required benefits to be contingent on future performance, creating a problem if tax was charged on the acquisition of the shares, to wait and see in such cases until the contingency had fallen away; and (c) to counteract consequent opportunities for tax avoidance, Grays Timber Products Ltd v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2010] UKSC 4, [2010] 1 W.L.R. 497 followed. The background to Ch.2 supported that view: it had been enacted to address aspects of previous provisions which had left them vulnerable to avoidance or created anomalies. It was in that context that it was necessary to consider the scope of the exemption conferred by s.425(2), and more specifically whether, in s.423(1), "any contract, agreement, arrangement or condition which makes provision to which any of subsections (2) to (4) applies" referred to "provision" with a genuine business or commercial purpose. The fact that Ch.2 had been introduced partly to forestall tax avoidance schemes self-evidently made it difficult to attribute to Parliament an intention that it should apply to schemes which were carefully crafted to fall within its scope purely for the purpose of tax avoidance. Further, it was difficult to accept that Parliament could have intended to encourage by exemption from taxation the award of shares to employees where the award of the shares had no purpose other than the obtaining of the exemption, a matter which was reflected in the fact that the shares were in a company which was brought into existence merely for the purposes of the scheme. The background to the legislation indicated that the s.425(2) exemption was designed to address the problem of valuing a benefit which was, for real-world business or commercial reasons, subject to a restrictive condition involving a contingency. Nothing suggested that Parliament had intended that s.423(2) should apply to transactions having no real-world business connection. Accordingly, adopting a purposive construction, the reference in s.423(1) to "any contract, agreement, arrangement or condition which makes provision to which any of subsections (2) to (4) applies", was to be construed as being limited to provision having a business or commercial purpose, and not to commercially irrelevant conditions whose only purpose was the obtaining of the exemption (see paras 74-78, 85 of judgment).
HELD (2) The condition in UBS's case was arbitrary and had no business or commercial rationale beyond tax avoidance. Such a condition was not relevant to the application of s.423. The condition was to be disregarded, meaning that the shares were not restricted securities within s.423. The restrictive condition in DB's case was equally artificial. The forfeiture provision had operated for only a short period, during which the possibility that it might be triggered lay largely within the control of the employee who would be adversely affected. It had no business or commercial purpose, Barclays Mercantile Business Finance Ltd v Mawson (Inspector of Taxes) [2004] UKHL 51, [2005] 1 A.C. 684 and Scottish Provident Institution v Inland Revenue Commissioners [2004] UKHL 52, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 3172 applied. The conditions were to be disregarded for the purpose of deciding whether the shares were restricted securities, Furniss (Inspector of Taxes) v Dawson [1984] A.C. 474 applied (paras 86-89). The employees therefore fell to be taxed in respect of their receipt of the shares in accordance with ordinary taxation principles. The shares could not be valued for income tax purposes without regard to the conditions. The conditions had reduced the shares' value on the date of acquisition by a small amount. Value had to be assessed as at the date of acquisition, taking the conditions into account (paras 90-95).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Reed JSC; Lord Carnwath JSC; Lord Hodge JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Paul Lasok QC, Richard Vallat, Anneliese Blackwood. For the first respondent: Kevin Prosser QC. For the second respondent: David Goy QC, Nicola Shaw QC.





NAME (wl) Harvey v Plymouth City Council
CITATION Harvey v Plymouth City Council [2010] EWCA Civ 860
CIT [2010] EWCA Civ 860
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Local Government; Breach of Duty of Care; Foreseeability; Implied Licences; Local Authorities' Liabilities; Occupiers' Liability; Personal Injury; Visitors
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant local authority appealed against a decision that it was liable for personal injury sustained by the respondent (H) on its land.
ABSTRACT H, when aged 21, had been out one evening drinking alcohol with friends. After leaving a taxi and running away to escape paying the fare, he had entered land owned by the local authority and fallen down a sheer drop onto an adjacent car parking area attached to a superstore. The land consisted of an area of grass bounded by shrubs and trees with a chain link fence next to the drop, which had been lowered to 14 inches above ground level at the place where H fell. H suffered serious injuries in the fall, including brain damage, and consequently sought damages from the local authority on the basis that it had been reasonably foreseeable that youths might fool around on that area of land, perhaps while under the influence of alcohol, and that he had therefore been an implied licensee who was owed a duty of care under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957. The judge found that H had entered the land in youthful high spirits and not with dishonest intent, and that such conduct, although not the detail of it, could and should have been foreseen by the local authority and that it should have taken steps to ensure that when on the land H was protected from the risk of serious injury by operating a system of inspection and maintenance of the chain fence to ensure visitors were not at risk of falling over the edge. The judge was therefore satisfied that H was the local authority's visitor in law and that it was in breach of its common law duty to him by not securely fencing the edge, although he assessed H's contributory negligence at 75 per cent.
ABSTRACT The local authority contended that even if there was some form of licence for general recreational use of the land, it had not extended to H's activity in running wildly, under the influence of alcohol, to escape a lawful obligation to pay a taxi fare, at night and in a way reckless as to his own safety.
SUMMARY When a local authority licensed the public to use its land for recreational purposes, it was consenting to normal recreational activities, carrying normal risks, and its duty as occupier to an implied licensee could not be stretched to cover any form of activity, however reckless.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD The duty under s.1(2) of the Act was to make premises reasonably safe for use for the purposes for which the visitor was invited or permitted by the occupier to be there and did not extend beyond the scope of activities for which the licence had been expressly or impliedly given, Hillen v ICI (Alkali) Ltd [1936] A.C. 65 and Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2003] UKHL 47, [2004] 1 A.C. 46 followed. In the instant case, even if H's conduct might have been foreseen by the local authority, foreseeability was not the relevant test. In deciding whether H was a licensee, the question was not whether his activity or similar activities might have been foreseen, but whether they had been impliedly consented to by the local authority. There was no evidence to support such a finding. When a local authority licensed the public to use its land for recreational purposes, it was consenting to normal recreational activities, carrying normal risks. An implied licence for general recreational activity could not be stretched to cover any form of activity, however reckless. The judge's conclusion, that at the time of the accident H was a "visitor" for the purposes of the Act, was therefore wrong. The local authority's implied licence had not extended to what H was doing on its land and did not found liability under the Act.
JUDGE Longmore LJ; Carnwath LJ; Hughes LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Edward Faulks QC, Catherine Brown. For the respondent: Stephen Killalea QC, Robert Hunter.






NAME (wl) Tedstone v Bourne Leisure Ltd
CITATION Tedstone v Bourne Leisure Ltd [2008] EWCA Civ 654
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 654
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Torts; Breach of Duty of Care; Duty of Care; Occupiers' Liability; Tripping and Slipping
ABSTRACT The appellant hotel (B) appealed against a decision that it was liable under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 for injuries caused to the respondent (T).
ABSTRACT T had been injured when she slipped on a pool of water in the vicinity of a jacuzzi situated at the end of a swimming pool on B's premises. At trial evidence was given that the area was clear of water five minutes before the accident. Documentary evidence was adduced that included an investigative report that some areas held water and required repairs. The judge held that there had been a pool of water caused by the jacuzzi bubbling furiously and that the presence of the water constituted a breach of s.2 of the Act.
ABSTRACT B contended that the duty of care imposed was too high as the water had been there for no longer than five minutes.
SUMMARY A hotel was not liable under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 for injuries caused to a guest who slipped on a pool of water in the vicinity of a jacuzzi, as the pool of water had only been there for a few minutes and was in an area where water had not gathered before.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD The accident had occurred in a place where water had not gathered before and there was evidence to show that water had not been present five minutes before the accident. Water of the volume described came from an unusual spillage from the jacuzzi which must have happened a minute or two before the accident. On the facts, no reasonable system would have dealt with the unusual occurrence in the time available, Ward v Tesco Stores Ltd [1976] 1 W.L.R. 810 distinguished. It was clear from the evidence that the accident had not occurred for want of due care on B's part.
JUDGE May LJ; Moore-Bick LJ; Richards LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Christopher Alldis. For the respondent: Paul Oakley.





NAME (wl) Poppleton v Trustees of the Portsmouth Youth Activities Committee
CITATION Poppleton v Trustees of the Portsmouth Youth Activities Committee [2008] EWCA Civ 646
CIT [2008] EWCA Civ 646
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Torts; Contributory Negligence; Duty to Warn; Falls From Height; Occupiers' Liability; Paralysis; Risk; Supervision
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant charity (C) appealed against a finding that it was in breach of its duty of care to the respondent (P) in relation to injuries sustained by P whilst he was rock climbing. P cross-appealed in relation to the extent that he was found contributorily liable.
ABSTRACT P was an inexperienced climber who had engaged in simulated rock climbing without ropes at C's indoor climbing premises. Rules forbidding jumping were displayed outside the climbing room but P was not referred to them. P attempted to leap from the back wall to a buttress on the opposite wall. P lost his grip and landed on his head on the matting below. P was rendered tetraplegic and brought a claim for damages on the grounds that C failed to provide sufficient supervision and had breached the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 s.2 . The judge concluded that there was nothing wrong with the state of the premises and that C was under no duty to assess P's competence or ensure that he had the necessary training. However, the judge upheld P's allegation that C was in breach of its duty of care to him by failing to warn him that thick safety matting did not make a climbing wall safe but might induce or encourage an unfounded belief that it did. The judge concluded that C was liable for 25 per cent of P's loss but that as the majority of the blame for the accident rested with P he was contributorily negligent to the extent of 75 per cent.
ABSTRACT C submitted that the judge erred in finding that the adequate safety matting could be characterised as a hidden or latent danger; and that it was obvious that a climber who fell awkwardly might suffer injury, so that there was no duty to explain the obvious to a consenting adult who did not ask for advice or supervision when none was offered. P contended that the judge was wrong to find him 75 per cent to blame when he accepted that P mistakenly believed, because of C's breach of duty, that it was safe to fall because of the matting; and that the judge should have found a duty to offer training and supervision.
SUMMARY Where there was an inherent risk of injury as a result of a voluntarily undertaken activity, the law did not require the occupier of the land that the activity occurred on to prevent an individual from engaging in that activity, or to train or supervise him whilst he did it.
HELD Appeal allowed, cross-appeal dismissed.
HELD It was extremely rare for an occupier of land to be under a duty to prevent people from taking risks which were inherent in the activities that they freely chose to undertake, Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2003] UKHL 47, [2004] 1 A.C. 46 applied. P engaged in the climbing activity of his own free will and the risk of falling was plainly obvious. The judge effectively held that it was not obvious that there was a risk that the matting might not always protect a climber from serious injury. That finding was not sustainable, since it was quite obvious that no amount of matting would avoid the possibility of injury from an awkward fall. There was an inherent risk in the activity that P voluntarily undertook. The law did not require C to prevent P from engaging in the activity and nor was it required to train or supervise him whilst he did it. If the law required training or supervision in the instant case, it would equally be required for a multitude of other commonplace leisure activities which nevertheless carried with them a degree of obvious inherent risk. It made no difference that C charged P to use the climbing wall, nor that the rules which they displayed could have been more prominent.
JUDGE May LJ; Richards LJ; Sir Paul Kennedy
COUNSEL For the appellant: William Norris QC. For the respondent: Christopher Sharp QC, Christopher Taylor.





NAME (wl) Hufton v Somerset CC
CITATION Hufton v Somerset CC [2011] EWCA Civ 789
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 789
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Local Government; Education; Torts; Local Education Authorities' Powers and Duties; Occupiers' Liability; Personal Injury; Preventive Measures; Schools; Tripping and Slipping
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant pupil (H) appealed against the dismissal of her claim for damages for personal injury against the respondent local authority.
ABSTRACT H, aged 15-and-a-half, had suffered a knee injury when she slipped and fell on a wet floor in the hall of her school. Her case was that on a rainy day the school staff had negligently permitted pupils to walk through some fire doors directly into the hall, thereby depositing water onto the floor. The judge had preferred the local authority's defence, which was that pupils were not permitted to directly enter the school hall on wet days and that a sign was placed by the fire doors on those days, which operated as an instruction to prefects to prevent pupils from entering. He found that the school's procedures were reasonable and appropriate and dismissed the incident as an unfortunate accident.
ABSTRACT H argued that there had been no proper system in place for (1) preventing the floor of the hall from becoming wet; (2) clearing up water if the floor did become wet.
SUMMARY A school which operated a policy of preventing pupils from entering the premises directly into the school hall on rainy days by erecting wet weather signs as soon as it started raining was not expected to have a system in place for observing and removing water deposited in the hall during the brief period of time between it starting to rain and the production of the wet weather signs. Accordingly, it was not liable to a pupil who slipped and fell in the hall during that period.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) The school's risk assessment was reasonable and identified appropriate control measures. Its recommendations had been properly implemented. If it started to rain during a break, there would be a delay before a wet-weather sign was placed by the fire doors, and a small amount of water could be deposited on the hall floor during that gap. On the day in question that was what probably happened. The law did not require an occupier of premises to take measures which would absolutely prevent any accident from ever occurring; all that was required was the exercise of reasonable care. The judge had made primary findings of fact and had evaluated those facts. He had not erred in his evaluation, so there was no reason to interfere with it (see paras 22-31 of judgment). (2) The evidence did not show that liquid gathering on the floor was a frequent problem or that there needed to be a special system for mopping it up. It was not realistic to expect the school to have a system in place for spotting and removing a small area of water during a brief period of time between the start of rain and the production of the wet-weather signs (paras 33-38).
JUDGE Sir Andrew Morritt C; Jackson LJ; Elias LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Brent McDonald. For the respondent: Paul Stagg.





NAME (wl) Butcher v Southend-on-Sea BC
CITATION Butcher v Southend-on-Sea BC [2014] EWCA Civ 1556
CIT [2014] EWCA Civ 1556
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Local Government; Breach of Duty of Care; Inspections; Occupiers' Liability; Tripping and Slipping
ABSTRACT The appellant local authority appealed against a decision that it was liable to the respondent (B) for personal injury damages for breach of its duty as the occupier of sheltered housing.
ABSTRACT B had been visiting her parents who had lived for some years in sheltered housing owned by the local authority. B's parents' accommodation overlooked the back entrance to the property and she used that entrance. When leaving she had walked along a tarmac path which ran diagonally from the entrance. Beside the path was an area of patchy grass. There was a difference in level between the path and the earth of just over two-and-a-half inches. The judge found that the edge of the path was clear and did not need to be marked. He found that B had stepped half on and half off the path and fallen. Shortly after the accident the local authority inspected the area, concluded that dry weather had caused the earth to shrink from the edge of the path, and instructed contractors to fill in the dip with topsoil to bring the surrounding area up to the level of the path. The judge held that the local authority was in breach of its duty as an occupier: it was foreseeable that someone might lose their footing at the edge of the path, as had happened, because of the change of levels. The defect was obvious and easily remedied. The hazard would have been seen by B if she had been paying attention. She was held 50 per cent contributorily negligent.
ABSTRACT The local authority argued that the judge had given insufficient weight to the fact that the manager and caretaker of the accommodation had a system of inspection and relied on Clerk and Lindsell on Torts where it was said that an occupier who reasonably acted on professional or semi-professional advice was likely to escape liability, whereas failure to perform an adequate risk assessment might well tip the balance in favour of liability.
SUMMARY In the circumstances a local authority was liable for personal injury suffered by a visitor to sheltered housing who had lost her footing at the edge of a path where the earth had shrunk away leaving a difference in levels. The hazard was obvious and the risk of injury foreseeable. It was not the kind of case where it was relevant to consider whether the local authority could rely on the existence of a system of inspection or risk assessment to avoid liability.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD The issue of a system of inspection was relevant where a hazard suddenly developed, such as a spillage of oil on the path, Ward v Tesco Stores Ltd [1976] 1 W.L.R. 810 considered. The hazard at the edge of the path had not developed within minutes or hours or even days. Nor was it the kind of hazard, such as the risk of branches dropping from trees, which required a professional risk assessment, Bowen v National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty [2011] EWHC 1992 (QB) considered. The drop at the edge of the path was obvious and had not been detected by the manager of the accommodation or the caretaker. The local authority relied on what was said in Clerk and Lindsell and on a disability discrimination audit which had not found anything wrong with the path. However, Clerk and Lindsell was not a checklist, and no one knew what the state of the path and surrounding area had been when the audit was carried out. The local authority said that the judge had not carried out the balancing exercise required by Beaton v Devon CC [2002] EWCA Civ 1675, (2003) 100(1) L.S.G. 26, but that case did not lay down any general principle. Each case turned on its own facts. It was a point in favour of the local authority that there had been no previous accident, but on the other hand the hazard had been rectified after the accident without difficulty or expense. The question for the judge was whether before the accident it was foreseeable that someone would inadvertently step off the path and lose their balance because of the drop. It could not possibly be said that the judge was wrong to find that that was foreseeable and to go on to find that the local authority had not taken such care as was reasonable in all the circumstances to see that visitors were reasonably safe. There was no error of law.
JUDGE Kitchin LJ; Bean LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: John Brooke-Smith. For the respondent: Jack Nicholls.





NAME (wl) West Sussex CC v Master Lewis Pierce
CITATION West Sussex CC v Master Lewis Pierce [2013] EWCA Civ 1230
CIT [2013] EWCA Civ 1230
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Local Government; Education; Personal Injury; Accidents; Children; Occupiers' Liability; School Premises; Visitors
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant local authority appealed against a decision that it was liable for an injury to the respondent child (P).
ABSTRACT P had been a nine-year-old pupil at a school run by the local authority. He had been playing with his brother by a metal wall-mounted water fountain on the school premises. P had intended to punch his brother, but had missed and punched the underside of the water fountain bowl instead. He lacerated his thumb and damaged the tendons. He made a full recovery but was left with a scar. The judge held that the school had not properly considered what risk the water fountain posed to children, that it had failed to carry out a properly considered risk assessment and that there was a distinct possibility that children might harm themselves on the water fountain.
SUMMARY A school was not under a duty to safeguard children from harm under all circumstances. A judge considering liability for a cut sustained by a child when he accidentally punched a metal water fountain should have considered under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 s.2 whether, as a matter of objective fact, visitors to the school were reasonably safe in using the premises, including the water fountain, bearing in mind that children did not behave like adults.
HELD Appeal allowed
HELD Appeal allowed. The judge had failed to identify or resolve the legal issues that required determination. Under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 s.2 the question to be addressed was whether, as a matter of objective fact, visitors to the school were reasonably safe in using the premises, including the water fountain, bearing in mind that children did not behave like adults. The answer was yes. There was no evidence that the water fountain was not reasonably safe. The edge could not be described as sharp, but even if it was sharp it could not be said to constitute a danger to children. The school was not under a duty to safeguard children from harm under all circumstances. The school was no more obliged as an occupier to take such steps in respect of the water fountain than it would be in respect of any of the other numerous edges, corners or surfaces against which children might accidentally injure themselves while on the premises (see paras 12, 17-18 of judgment).
JUDGE Lord Dyson MR; McFarlane LJ; Sharp LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Iain O'Donnell. For the respondent: Shahram Sharghy.





NAME (wl) Phipps v Rochester Corporation
CITATION Phipps v Rochester Corporation [2016] EWHC 664 (Ch)
CIT [2016] EWHC 664 (Ch)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Tax; Breach of Duty of Care; Capital Taxation; Causation; Damages; Employee Benefit Trusts; Knowledge; Limitations; Professional Negligence; Solicitors; Tax Avoidance
ABSTRACT The claimant, the head of a group of companies, brought a professional negligence claim against the defendant solicitor on whose advice he had established an employee benefit trust.
ABSTRACT The claimant had been advised by a firm of accountants to consider mitigating capital gains tax liability by establishing a private unit trust. The defendant had proposed the employee benefit trust instead, without knowledge of the accountants' advice. The group entered into the scheme, modelled on the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 s.28(4), by establishing a discretionary trust for the benefit of the group's employees, excluding specified persons, on the basis that a shareholder's family could benefit from the scheme only after his or her death. The claimant entered into a deed of gift of his shares in favour of the trust. The business was sold. In 2010, HMRC assessed the claimant to tax arising from the trust on the basis that s.28(4) was to be construed as excluding persons connected to the participating shareholder from benefit at any time, whereas the claimant's family were able to benefit from the trust after his death. The claimant reached a settlement with HMRC and wound up the employee benefit trust. In 2013, he brought the instant claim to recover his losses on the basis that, had he not entered into the scheme, he would have avoided the tax by entering into a private unit trust. The defendant claimed that his interpretation of s.28 was correct and that, in any event, no reasonably competent lawyer would have been expected to warn of an alternative interpretation whereby the scheme might not work. Alternatively, the defendant contended that the claim was statute-barred and that the private unit trust would not have worked.
ABSTRACT The claimant interpreted s.28(4) as meaning that, in order for a transfer into a trust to be exempt, payments of capital benefits must not be permitted to persons who were connected to the transferor at the time when the transfer of value was made, whereas the defendant submitted that the relevant time was when the benefit was applied to such persons.
SUMMARY A solicitor who had recommended an employee benefit trust as a tax avoidance scheme was not negligent notwithstanding his client's subsequent assessment to tax. His interpretation of the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 s.28(4) was probably correct, and was one that was shared by other experienced tax specialists. Although the solicitor had failed to warn the client about the possibility of HMRC challenging the scheme, and the risk of it not being upheld in ensuing litigation, the client had expressed his understanding of the inherent risks in tax planning schemes.
HELD Claim dismissed.
HELD (1) Whether a warning of an alternative interpretation of a scheme such as that in issue was required depended entirely on the circumstances, and in particular whether there were strong factors favouring an alternative interpretation, Dixey & Sons v Parsons considered, Herrmann v Withers LLP [2012] EWHC 1492 (Ch), [2012] 4 Costs L.R. 712 and Matrix Securities Ltd v Theodore Goddard [1998] S.T.C. 1 applied (see paras 127, 136-138, 146-147 of judgment).
HELD (2) The claimant's interpretation of s.28(4) was not obvious or likely because it would have the effect that s.28(4)(a) would exclude someone who was a participator at the date of the transfer of value into the trust, whereas s.28(4)(c) was clearly intended to cover a person who was a participator at the time of such a transfer; moreover, s.28(4)(d) would not cover someone who was not a connected person at the time of the transfer but became so connected afterwards. However, several experienced tax specialists had independently interpreted s.28(4) in the same way as the defendant without apparently considering that there was a likely alternative construction. Therefore, the defendant was not in breach of his duty of care in taking the view that the scheme satisfied the conditions of s.28 or in failing to warn the claimant that there was a risk that it would not be effective to avoid his tax liability unless his family were excluded from benefits even after his death (paras 155-159, 165-166, 168, 242).
HELD (3) Any competent tax solicitor putting forward such a scheme to their clients in 1998 would have given a general warning that, since the scheme was one which involved tax avoidance, there was the possibility of a challenge by HMRC and a risk that the scheme would not be upheld in any ensuing litigation. To that extent, the defendant was in breach of his duty of care. However, since the claimant would not have been deterred from entering into the employee benefit trust if he had received such a warning, the defendant's breach of duty had not caused the claimant any loss (paras 173-174, 181).
HELD (4) If that conclusion were wrong, the claim would not have been out of time because, for the purposes of the Limitation Act 1980 s.14A, the claimant did not have actual or constructive knowledge before the three-year period prior to the bringing of his claim that he had suffered damage when entering into the deed of gift (paras 182-184, 193).
HELD (5) Had he not entered into the employee benefit trust, the claimant would probably have entered into the private unit trust, since he was keen to avoid a very substantial tax liability and had actively considered that as an alternative. A challenge to the private unit trust scheme was unlikely to have succeeded. Had the defendant been found liable, the claimant would have been entitled to recover 70% of the settlement figure and the foreseeable expenditure of professional fees and costs incurred in dismantling the scheme (paras 200, 216, 223, 228, 242).
JUDGE Roth J
COUNSEL For the claimant: Michael Furness QC, Dakis Hagen. For the second defendant: Jonathan Seitler QC, Emily Campbell, Stephen Hackett.





NAME (wl) Roles v Nathan
CITATION Roles v Nathan [2016] EWCA Civ 120
CIT [2016] EWCA Civ 120
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure Other Related Subjects: Company Law; Commercial Court; Costs Budgets; Non-Resident Companies; Security For Costs
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The defendant appealed against a judge's refusal to order the claimant to provide security for costs under CPR r.25.13(2)(c).
ABSTRACT The claimant, a BVI company, had sought damages alleging that gas oil it had purchased from the defendant Swiss company did not meet contractual specifications. The defendant denied that allegation, but contended that if true, then that was the fault of the company from whom it had bought the oil; it had accordingly commenced Pt.20 damages proceedings against the supplier or sought an indemnity in respect of the instant claim. The defendant, seeking security for costs, relied on r.25.13(2)(c). The claimant did not reveal its financial position and there was no publicly available financial information. A judge refused the order, stating that there was no reason to believe that the claimant would be unable to pay the defendant's costs if ordered to do so and that it had been reticent about revealing its financial position as it would benefit settlement negotiations. The judge added that he suspected it had become Commercial Court practice to order security for costs where a company had not filed publicly available accounts, had no discernible assets and had declined to reveal its financial position; but, if such practice had developed, it was not justified and he would not follow it. Although the judge did not need to determine the scope of the security, if he had ordered security, he would have included the defendant's costs of suing the supplier but excluded the costs for which it would be liable to the supplier. He would have also adhered to the amounts set out in the defendant's costs budget. The issues were (1) whether the judge had been justified in not following Commercial Court practice; (2) whether the defendant's own Pt.20 costs should be included in any order for security for costs, as well as the costs the defendant would have to pay the supplier in respect of the supplier defeating the Pt.20 proceedings; (3) the role of costs budgets in determining the scope of security.
SUMMARY The Commercial Court's practice to award security for costs against a foreign company which was not obliged to publish accounts, had no discernible assets, and had declined to reveal its financial position, was a sound one which should be upheld.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) To order for security for costs, the court had to believe that a claimant would not be able to pay them; that test should not be elevated to a test on the balance of probabilities, Unisoft Group (No.2), Re [1993] B.C.L.C. 532 and Jirehouse Capital v Beller [2008] EWCA Civ 908, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 751 applied. That was a matter of evaluation: the court should only interfere if the judge applied some wrong principle, failed to take a relevant matter into account, took an irrelevant matter into account or was plainly wrong, Assicurazioni Generali SpA v Arab Insurance Group (BSC) [2002] EWCA Civ 1642, [2003] 1 W.L.R. 577 applied. In the instant case, the judge had been plainly wrong: if a company was given every opportunity to show that it could pay a defendant's costs and deliberately refused, there was every reason to believe that, if and when it was required to pay a defendant's costs, it would be unable to do so. Even if deliberate reticence to reveal a company's financial position was not a breach of CPR r.1.3, the court should take account of that as part of the overall picture. If, therefore, there were to be a practice of the Commercial Court that security for costs would often be granted against a foreign company who was not obliged to publish accounts, had no discernible assets and declined to reveal anything about its financial position, the practice was a sound one which should be upheld, Mbasogo v Logo [2006] EWCA Civ 608 applied (see paras 11-13, 17, 19-20 of judgment). (2) If the claimant were to lose in the instant proceedings, then the supplier will have won against the defendant, who would have to pay the supplier's costs. It was highly likely that the defendant would be entitled to recover those costs from the claimant, as well as its own costs in both proceedings. Those costs then became the defendant's own costs, for which it ought to be able to obtain security if it was fair to speak of them as being added to the defendant's costs, as it was in the instant case, Johnson v Ribbins [1977] 1 W.L.R. 1458 applied. Accordingly, the decision to include the defendant's own costs in an order for security was upheld, but the exclusion of the supplier's costs was reversed. An order that the claimant should provide security for costs in the agreed sum was made (paras 25-26, 30). (3) Although a costs budget set out incurred and estimated costs, under CPR PD 3E para.7.4 the court only formally approved the estimated costs; and it was only in relation to those costs that the court would not depart from the approved budget "unless satisfied that there is good reason to do so" under CPR r.3.18(b). However, the court could still comment on the incurred costs element of costs budgets, as well as take them into account when considering the reasonableness and proportionality of estimated costs. Those comments will carry significant weight when exercising its general discretion as to costs at the end of a trial. Therefore, the practical effect of a comment on already incurred costs might be similar to the effect of formal approval of estimated costs in a cost budget. In the instant case, the judge had been correct to take an approved costs budget as the reference point to work out the defendant's own costs which should be provided by way of security, and the supplier's costs budget as the reference point for calculating its costs which were to be passed on to the defendant and recovered from the claimant (paras 41-43, 47, 49).
JUDGE Longmore LJ; Sales LJ; Baker J
COUNSEL For the appellant: David Lewis QC, Oliver Caplin. For the respondents: Michael Nolan QC.





NAME (wl) Haseldine v Daw
CITATION Haseldine v Daw [2016] CSIH 3
CIT [2016] CSIH 3
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Duty of Care; Fire Services; Negligence; Scotland
ABSTRACT A fire service (S) reclaimed against a decision of the Lord Ordinary allowing a proof before answer in an action of damages raised against S by the the heritable proprietors (H) of a farmhouse (F) for damages on the basis of S's alleged negligence in extinguishing a fire at F (A J Allan (Blairnyle) Ltd v Strathclyde Fire Board [2014] CSOH 135).
ABSTRACT On 31 October 2008, S had extinguished a fire at F and had left the scene at approximately 3 pm. H averred that rotten timbers in the roof space had continued to smoulder such that the fire had reignited in the early hours of the morning on 1 November and F had burned down, and that once the fire had appeared to be extinguished, S ought to have used thermal imaging to locate any questionable areas and further ought to have maintained a regular check on F to ensure that the fire had truly been extinguished.
SUMMARY Firefighters attending the scene of a fire did not owe a duty of care to the heritable proprietor where they had assumed responsibility for controlling and extinguishing the fire but had failed to do so; the carefully developed, policy based, more restrictive approach approved and adopted by the Supreme Court had to be followed by the Scottish courts, and the court had to disapprove of Duff v Highlands and Islands Fire Board, 1995 S.L.T. 1362, Gibson v Orr, 1999 S.C. 420 and Burnett v Grampian Fire and Rescue Services, 2007 S.L.T. 61.
HELD Reclaiming motion allowed.
HELD (1) Recent authorities from the House of Lords and Supreme Court had emphasised the requirement for a careful approach to the liability of public authorities to private individuals, the circumstances of the third case in Capital were very similar to the circumstances in the present case, and the Court of Appeal's conclusion, that the fire brigade was not liable, had been specifically approved by the House of Lords in Gorringe v Calderdale Metropolitan Borough Council [2004] 1 W.L.R. 1057 and had not been criticised by the Supreme Court in Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales Police [2015] 2 W.L.R., and the carefully developed, policy based, more restrictive approach, approved and adopted by the Supreme Court, had to be followed by the Scottish courts, contrary to the views expressed in Duff v Highlands and Islands Fire Board, 1995 S.L.T. 1362, Gibson v Orr, 1999 S.C. 420 and Burnett v Grampian Fire and Rescue Services, 2007 S.L.T. 61 but in keeping with Mackay v Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, 2015 S.L.T. 342; (i) the fire service ought not to be regarded as having undertaken an assumption of responsibility, in the sense defined in the authorities, on the basis of answering a 999 call, attending the scene of a fire or taking steps to extinguish a fire or to save lives or property, as those actions represented them carrying out their statutory functions and public duty; (ii) general policy considerations required be taken into account; (iii) while analogies might be drawn with the provision of medical services, or the ambulance service, they were of limited assistance, (iv) there was no general duty to rescue, the fire service had been held not to be liable if they failed to attend a fire, therefore, it seemed unprincipled to suggest that a fire service which did attend a fire and sought to extinguish it could be held liable for their actions, other than in circumstances where they negligently inflicted fresh injury; and (v) the line of English authority relevant to the liability of public bodies including fire services was well established and of considerable authority and it would be unfortunate to adopt a different approach in Scotland, East Suffolk Rivers Catchment Board v Kent [1941] A.C. 74, Capital & Counties Plc , Gorringe , Mitchell v Glasgow City Council, 2009 S.C. (HL) 21 and Michael , considered , Duff , Gibson and Burnett , disapproved and Mackay , approved . (2) In the present case, S owed a duty of care to the general public, including H but that duty was to take care not to negligently inflict a fresh injury; there were neither averments that S had made matters worse or that they had inflicted a fresh injury when they had arrived at, and dealt with, the fire, nor of circumstances which could properly be categorised as an assumption of responsibility giving rise to a common law duty to exercise reasonable care, and further, it would not be fair, just or reasonable to impose a duty of care of the scope contended for by H on S, thus H's case would necessarily fail even were all their averments proved, and the case as pled was irrelevant. Observed , per Lord Drummond Young, (1) that a distinction might properly be drawn between injury to the person and damage to property, consequently, it was hoped that in an appropriate case the law might develop in such a way that, at least in clear cases where action could be taken without danger to the rescuer, the officers of a public service such as the fire service or the police were obliged to take action to rescue persons in danger; (2) that the law had moved in the direction of attaching greater significance to the more traditional categorisation of distinct and recognisable situations as guides to the existence, scope and limits of the varied duties of care which the law imposed but rules derived from existing case law ought not to be applied mechanically to new situations, instead it should be asked whether, as a matter of policy directed to the specific situation under consideration, a new analysis was required, which would result in a law of negligence that was less unified than in the past but which dealt more fairly with individual cases.
JUDGE Lady Paton; Lady Dorrian; Lord Drummond Young
COUNSEL For the reclaimers: R Dunlop QC, E Campbell. For the respondents: Balfour.





NAME (wl) Maguire v Sefton MBC
CITATION Maguire v Sefton MBC [2006] EWCA Civ 316
CIT [2006] EWCA Civ 316
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Duty of Care; Inspections; Occupiers' Liability; Visitors
SUMMARY There was no distinction to be drawn between the liability owed under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 to a contractual visitor and that owed to non contractual visitors. Under the Act, a local authority had not been liable to a visitor to its leisure centre for injuries sustained in the course of using gymnasium equipment where the authority had entered into a maintenance service agreement with a third party for the maintenance of the equipment and that third party had recently carried out an inspection of the equipment.
SUMMARY The appellant local authority (S) appealed against a decision that it was liable for injuries sustained by the respondent (M) in an accident at a leisure centre operated by it. The gymnasium at the leisure centre had comprised a number of machines, including an uphill climbing machine. All the machines were manufactured by a company in America, and the second defendant (P) was the seller and maintenance provider for them. S had entered into a maintenance service agreement with P in respect of the machines; however, before completion of the agreement could take place, an engineer from P had carried out a pre contractual inspection. No defects had been found in the relevant machine and the contract was duly entered. A little over a month later M was using the climbing machine when the resistance of the machine gave in, causing M to fall backwards and injure himself. On a claim for damages for the injuries sustained the trial judge held both S and P to blame. The judge found that S had been in breach of an implied term of contract between it and M, since M was a paying entrant to the leisure centre, and further found that S had been in breach of its common duty of care under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 by failing to put into place a system of checking the safety of the equipment in the gymnasium. S argued that (1) the judge had erred in applying a different standard of care on the ground of an implied contractual term rather than the duty owed under the Act; (2) under the Act the judge had erred in finding that S had been in breach of its duty of care in light of the service agreement with P.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) it was clear that s.5 of the Act was meant to do away with the previous common law distinction between an occupier's liability towards a non contractual visitor and a visitor entering under a contract. Accordingly, the judge had erred by seeking to draw a distinction between S's liability as an occupier to M as a contracting party and its liability as an occupier under the Act. (2) S was entitled to rely upon P as the expert to perform a proper inspection of the relevant machine at the pre contractual inspection. The reason for the pre contractual inspection was to ensure that the machine was in good order, and notwithstanding the lack of any contractual obligations existing at that time, P was at risk to subsequent users of the machine. S was entitled to consider that it had employed experts and had taken proper steps by entering into the service contract so as to meet its duties under the Act. There was nothing in the evidence to support a finding that S could be criticised for failing to inspect or maintain the machines or that it should have been aware of the defect. Accordingly there was no substance in the finding of liability under the Act.
JUDGE Rix LJ; Carnwath LJ; Jacob LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Yaqub Rahman. For the respondent: Peter Goodbody.





NAME (wl) Clark v Bourne Leisure Limited
CITATION Clark v Bourne Leisure Limited [2011] EWCA Civ 753
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 753
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury; Occupiers' Liability; Personal Injury; Reasonable Care; Wheelchairs
ABSTRACT The appellant company (B) appealed against a decision awarding damages to the respondent (C) on her claim for personal injuries.
ABSTRACT Whilst on holiday at one of B's sites C, who used an electric wheelchair, visited a bar. The bar was on different levels; on one side of the room the levels were connected by a ramp, on the other they were connected by two steps situated several feet apart. C went up the ramp but later when she wished to go to the lower level used the steps by mistake, tipping her wheelchair causing her to fall out and sustain injuries. C claimed damages on the basis that the premises did not comply with the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 s.2 as the steps were a concealed hazard. The judge held that the premises were not reasonably safe for a wheelchair user.
SUMMARY Although a wheelchair user had mistakenly gone down steps in her wheelchair, causing her to fall out and sustain personal injuries, the premises were reasonably safe for wheelchair users as a ramp was provided and the steps were clearly visible to any wheelchair user taking reasonable care.
HELD Appeal allowed; Claim dismissed.
HELD (1) When assessing whether the premises were reasonably safe for wheelchair users it was incumbent on the judge to make his own judgment about the matter. On the evidence it was clear that he had been influenced in his own decision as to safety by the opinions of B's manager. Further, the judge was wrong to conclude that B had conceded that there should have been signage warning of the steps. Accordingly, his decision could not stand (see paras 16-17 of judgment). (2) It was appropriate for the instant court to consider the issue of safety rather than remit the case. On the evidence, the premises were reasonably safe for wheelchair users. A ramp was available and entirely safe for wheelchair users. The steps were not safe for wheelchairs but they were clearly visible and any wheelchair user taking reasonable care for his safety would avoid using them (para.20).
HELD 
JUDGE Lord Neuberger MR; Elias LJ; Dame Janet Smith
COUNSEL For the appellant: Christopher Alldis. For the respondent: Roderick Spinks.





NAME (wl) Tomlinson v Congleton BC
CITATION Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2003] UKHL 47
CIT [2003] UKHL 47
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Local Government; Duty to Warn; Occupiers' Liability; Personal Injury; Risk; Standard of Care
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY When considering, for the purposes of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984, what steps, if any, an occupier of land should have taken to prevent an accident, the court should take into account the cost of taking the steps, the social value of the activities that the taking of the steps would prohibit and whether those of full capacity should be allowed to decide for themselves whether to take the relevant risk.
SUMMARY A local authority appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 309, [2003] 2 W.L.R. 1120) that, as the owner and occupier of a country park, it had owed a duty of care to T pursuant to the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 s.1 and was liable for serious personal injuries that T had sustained when he dived into the shallow water at the edge of a lake and struck his head on the bottom. Swimming in the lake was prohibited and the local authority had erected notices and distributed leaflets warning of the dangers of swimming in the lake. It was accepted that the relevant statutory duty was that owed to a trespasser under the 1984 Act and not the duty owed to a lawful visitor under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 s.2(2) because, by virtue of the prohibition on swimming, when T had entered the water to swim he had become a trespasser. T argued that the local authority had owed him a duty under s.1(4) of the 1984 Act to take such care as was reasonable in all the circumstances to ensure that he did not suffer injury on the premises by reason of the danger concerned. Further, that that duty had not been discharged by the erection of notices because people had ignored those notices which meant that they were obviously ineffectual.
HELD allowing the appeal, that the lake did not present risks due to the state of the premises or anything done or omitted to be done on the premises, pursuant to s.1(1)(a) of the 1984 Act. Accordingly, there was nothing which gave rise to a duty on the part of the local authority. Even if swimming had not been prohibited and the local authority had owed a duty under s.2(2) of the 1957 Act, it would not have been required to take steps to prevent T from diving or to warn him against dangers which were obvious, Donoghue v Folkestone Properties Ltd [2003] EWCA Civ 231 and Taylor v Glasgow City Council [1922] 1 A.C. 44 applied. T was a person of full capacity who had voluntarily chosen to engage in an activity which had inherent dangers.
JUDGE Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hutton; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough; Lord Scott of Foscote
COUNSEL For T: Bill S Braithwaite Q.C. and Gerard Martin Q.C. For the local authority: Raymond Machell Q.C. and Peter Burns.





NAME (wl) Donoghue v Folkstone Properties
CITATION Donoghue v Folkstone Properties [2003] EWCA Civ 231
CIT [2003] EWCA Civ 231
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Divers; Duty of Care; Occupiers' Liability; Personal Injury; Trespassers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Properly construed, the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 s.1(3)(b) imposed a duty of care on the occupier only in circumstances where, at the time of the incident giving rise to the claim, he ought reasonably to have known that his property could be trespassed in the way that it was by the claimant.
SUMMARY F, the owner and occupier of a harbour, appealed against a finding that it was liable under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 for the injuries sustained by D when diving into the harbour. After midnight in late December D dived from a slipway in the harbour and broke his neck after hitting a grid pile located some two feet below the surface of the water. F argued that the duty that was owed to offer some protection to a trespasser against a danger extended only to the time or times at which the occupier had reasonable grounds for believing that the trespasser might be in the vicinity of and at risk from the danger. Accordingly, since there had been no reasonable grounds for believing that anyone would be swimming in the vicinity of the slipway at night in mid winter, it had owed no duty to D at the time of his accident.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) it was arguable that an injury suffered by a trespasser as a result of a concealed obstruction below what appeared to be deep water could be attributed, in part, to the "state of the premises" for the purposes of s.1(1)(a) of the Act, and (2) while consideration of a class of trespasser might be useful when approaching the question raised by s.1(3)(b) of whether the occupier had reasonable grounds for believing that the trespasser might come into the vicinity of the danger, it would be necessary to consider whether any duty was owed to the particular member of the class who suffered the injury. A duty to offer some protection to children known to be in the vicinity of the danger might, for example, exist in circumstances where the occupier could not reasonably be expected to offer any protection to an adult. The question of whether a duty of care existed under the 1984 Act had to be determined with reference to the circumstances prevailing at the time that it was alleged that the breach of duty caused injury to the claimant. At the time that D had sustained his injuries, F had had no reason to believe that he would be diving from the slipway and the criterion of s.1(3)(b) had not been satisfied, Ratcliff v McConnell [1999] 1 W.L.R. 670 and White v St Albans City and District Council Times, March 12, 1990 applied and Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2002] EWCA Civ 309 considered.
JUDGE Lord Phillips MR; Brooke LJ; Laws LJ
COUNSEL For D: Bill Braithwaite Q.C. and Alan Saggerson. For F: Lawrence West.





NAME (wl) Keown v Coventry Healthcare NHS Trust
CITATION Keown v Coventry Healthcare NHS Trust [2006] EWCA Civ 39
CIT [2006] EWCA Civ 39
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Personal Injury; Age; Children; Occupiers' Liability; Trespassers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY An 11 year old child who had climbed the outside of a fire escape was not at risk of suffering injury by reason of any danger due to the state of the premises within the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 s.1(1)(a) but had put himself at risk through his own choice to indulge in a dangerous activity. If there was a danger attributable to the state of the premises, thus giving rise to a potential duty, the content of the duty might vary according to whether the trespasser was a child or an adult, but until that point was reached, then in the general run of cases, the age of the trespasser was not relevant.
SUMMARY The appellant healthcare trust appealed against the county court decision that it was liable for the personal injuries suffered by the respondent trespasser (K). K had been 11 years old at the time of the accident. He had been climbing the underside of a fire escape at the trust's hospital premises when he fell to ground and was injured. The fire escape went to the top (third) floor of the building. It was in part of the hospital grounds that were used by the public as a means of going between the streets on either side. The judge held that there existed a danger due to the state of the premises within the Occupiers' Liability Act 1984 s.1(1)(a) . He held that K was two thirds responsible for what had happened. The trust submitted that the fire escape was not itself dangerous and that any danger was due to K's activity on the premises and not the state of the premises. K submitted that there was danger due to the state of the premises "as found by" K, since the fire escape was amenable to being climbed from the outside with a consequent risk of harm from falling from a height and constituted an inducement to children habitually playing in the grounds of the hospital.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) the authorities would conclude the question in favour of the trust if K was an adult, Donoghue v Folkestone Properties Ltd [2003] EWCA Civ 231 and Tomlinson v Congleton BC [2003] UKHL 47 considered. Premises that were not dangerous from the point of view of an adult could be dangerous for a child and whether they were was a question of fact and degree. However, it would not be right to ignore a child's choice to indulge in a dangerous activity in every case merely because he was a child. The judge had found that K had not only appreciated that there was a risk of falling but also that what he was doing was dangerous and that he should not have been climbing the exterior of the fire escape. In the circumstances, it could not be said that K did not recognise the danger, and the risk arose not out of the state of the premises, which were as one would expect them to be, but out of what K chose to do, Young v Kent CC [2005] EWHC 1342 considered. Therefore, K had not suffered injury by reason of any danger due to the state of the premises and did not pass the threshold requirement in s.1(1)(a) of the 1984 Act. (2) If there could be said to have been a risk by reason of a danger due to the state of the premises and the risk could be said to have arisen because the fire escape was unguarded or unfenced, K could have brought himself within s.1(3)(a) of the 1984 Act because the trust knew that the fire escape was unguarded and unfenced. K could also bring himself within s.1(3)(b), since the trust knew that children played in the vicinity of the unguarded or unfenced fire escape. It was doubtful whether K could have brought himself within s.1(3)(c) because it would not be reasonable to expect the trust to offer protection from such a risk.
JUDGE Mummery LJ; Longmore LJ
COUNSEL For the claimant: Martin Porter, Nina Goolamali. For the defendant: Paul Bleasdale QC, William Pusey.





NAME (wl) Platt v Liverpool City Council
CITATION Platt v Liverpool City Council Official Transcript
CIT Official Transcript
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Children; Occupiers' Liability; Trespass
SUMMARY occupiers liability; trespass to land; children overcoming eight foot high fence to enter vandalised property; no liability for child's death
SUMMARY For several years L engaged in a rehousing programme which involved the emptying, repairing, and in some instances, the demolition of various properties. Properties which had been vacated were secured against intruders with metal sheets over windows and doors, and L's employees routinely checked premises to see whether the shuttering had become insecure. On August 21, 1995 an employee of L found that the shutters at 2 Newlands Close were insecure and, on inspection, the property was found to be so badly vandalised that it needed to be demolished. Since that would take about a week L erected an eight foot high corrugated metal fence around the property, secured by wooded posts fixed in concrete. The next day a group of four boys gained entrance to the property and, whilst they were inside, the building collapsed, killing P and injuring K. P's father and K sued L under the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934 , Fatal Accidents Act 1976 and in damages for personal injuries. The trial judge found in favour of L on the issue of liability. P's father and K appealed.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that the duty of L under the Occupiers Liability Act 1984 s.1(4) was to take such care as was reasonable in all the circumstances of the case. At the time the boys entered the property it was surrounded by an eight foot fence which could be overcome only by climbing over it or wriggling under it through an eight inch gap and there was no evidence that on any previous occasion any child had done either of those things. To say that by providing such a fence L did not take such care as was reasonable in all the circumstances of the case to see that these four boys did not suffer injury on the premises would be absurd.
JUDGE Kennedy LJ; McCullough J
COUNSEL For P: John Gruffydd. For LCC: Tania Griffiths.





NAME (wl) Stennett v Hancock
CITATION Stennett v Hancock [2016] UKFTT 82 (TC)
CIT [2016] UKFTT 82 (TC)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Tax Other Related Subjects: Human Rights; Fraud; Privilege Against Self-Incrimination; Right to Fair Trial; Tax Enquiries; Tax Evasion; Tax Returns
SUMMARY Where HMRC suspected tax fraud on the part of a company director, and had issued notices under the Finance Act 2008 Sch.36 for him and his companies to provide documents and information, as well as opening enquiries into relevant corporation tax returns and self-assessment tax returns, the taxpayer's right against self-incrimination: (a) did not allow him to refuse to respond to the Sch.36 notices; (b) did not extend to his companies; (c) did not provide him or his companies with a reasonable excuse for non-compliance with the Sch.36 notices; and (d) did not allow him or his companies to refuse to respond to enquiries raised as part of the corporation tax and self-assessment enquiries. The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to close HMRC's investigation into whether the taxpayer should be prosecuted for tax fraud.
HELD Preliminary issues determined.
JUDGE Judge Anne Redston
COUNSEL For the fifteenth appellant: In person. For the third appellant: No appearance or representation. For the remaining appellants: James Onalaja. For the respondents: Michael Jones.





NAME (wl) Evans v Triplex Safety Glass
CITATION Evans v Triplex Safety Glass [2015] CSOH 178
CIT [2015] CSOH 178
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure; Contaminated Land; Pleadings; Remoteness; Scotland
ABSTRACT Residents (M) of a street, which was formerly an industrial site, raised an action against developers (C) and environmental consultants (S) alleging that the site was contaminated with harmful chemicals which they had inhaled to their detriment.
ABSTRACT M pled common law fault against C and S, as well as breach of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 s.33(1)(a), in respect of which they sought damages in terms of s.73(6). M further claimed that their registered social landlord (L) had breached an implied term of their tenancy agreement that a house be provided in a tenantable and habitable condition, and were thereafter in breach of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 that a house be provided which was fit for human habitation.
ABSTRACT At procedure roll, each of the defenders raised pleas to the relevancy and argued that the action was time barred in terms of the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act 1973 s.17. M averred inter alia that C were responsible for constructing the part of the site where M's homes were located and that C knew of the risks to human health from contamination of land through the former uses thereof; that while remediation works carried out by S in 1993 and 1994 were neither commissioned nor instructed by C, they were nevertheless provided with copies of reports from which C should have known no testing had been done for solvents; C had failed to instruct further investigation of contamination for polyaromatic hydrocarbons or carcinogenic material in response to investigations done at part of the site in 2000 and 2001; and that they had failed to take reasonable care as a result of which the site continued to be contaminated by a variety of volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds. M's case against S was predicated on their being environmental consultants, responsible for the investigation and remediation of the site, and it was averred inter alia that they failed to investigate and advise on the nature, concentration and distribution of contamination of the site by solvents as a reasonably competent environmental consultant would have done.
SUMMARY A common law action by residents of a street, which was formerly an industrial site, against environmental consultants was relevantly pled and would be allowed to proceed where it was fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care on them.
HELD Case put out by order.
HELD (1) M's common law case directed against C was irrelevant: C's duty of reasonable care was sufficiently discharged by considering the terms of S's reports and given that C was not averred to have had any specialised knowledge of environmental matters, there was no proper basis for averring that C knew, or ought to have known, from S's reports of 1991, 1992 and 1994 that the investigations had been limited; in order to succeed, M would have had to establish that C owed them a non-delegable duty of care which, after a consideration of the authorities, they could not do, and to the extent that M sought to invoke the hazardous operations exception to the general rule, their attempt was misconceived where developing residential housing did not fall therein and, in the circumstances, C's personal duty of care did not extend to checking S's work. (2) M had pled a relevant common law case against S and were entitled to a proof: the duty cast on S was said to have been to take reasonable care in the performance of their work as environmental consultants for the safety of those whom they knew would occupy the houses to be built on the land, that it was their responsibility to investigate for contamination and to remediate, and in the circumstances of this case, it was not arguable that it would not be fair, just or reasonable to impose such a duty of care on S, Mitchell v Glasgow City Council [2008] CSIH 19, 2008 S.C. 351, distinguished ; it would not be possible until after proof to determine the precise nature and extent of S's duties to M over the entire period of S's involvement in the development but M had averred enough to entitle them to an inquiry. (3) M's case against L fell to be dismissed: in so far as M's case relied on the provisions of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987, it was based on a misconstruction of the implied terms on which they founded, statutory and common law made it clear that a landlord's obligations related to the repair of the fabric of the let property itself, in respect of which M had averred no defect; thereafter in respect of the alleged breach of statutory duty in the context of the 2001 Act, there was no averment that before the commencement of the Scottish secure tenancy or of when M became joint tenants, that L had failed to ensure that the house was reasonably fit for human habitation. (4) M's contention that either C or S were in breach of s.33(1) of the 1990 Act had to be rejected: M had offered to prove, and had relevantly averred, that the ash, slag, volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds, and the ground contaminated thereby, in the part of the site where M's homes were built was controlled waste for the purposes of Pt II of the Act, but M was specific about the dates when such waste was redistributed, namely the first quarters of 1993 and 1994, following the completion of which, S had issued a certificate of substantial completion in respect of which M contended that an act of deposit continued indefinitely but the contention that s.33(1) applied to a continuing state of affairs was misplaced, Thames Waste Management Ltd v Surrey CC [1997] Env. L.R. 148, considered . (5) M's averments of causation were sufficient to entitle them to lead evidence to the effect that they had each suffered injury to their health as a result of the inhalation of solvents which, but for S's fault, would have been discovered and removed before their homes were built. (6) On the time bar issue, M's position was that neither had been aware until sometime after September 2009 that their injuries were attributable in whole, or in part, to an act or omission thus on the face of it, their right of action had expired and if postponement of the commencement of the triennium were to be put in issue, it would be for M to do so by asserting that it would not have been reasonably practicable to have become aware that their injuries were attributable, in whole or in part, to an act or omission so that the defenders would be given an opportunity to assert the contrary; it might be that all M required to add was a formal averment to the effect that it would not have been reasonably practicable for them to have acquired knowledge that the injuries were caused by an act or omission until a date falling after September 2009, and the case would be put out by order to allow M's advisers the opportunity to consider the sufficiency of their pleadings.
JUDGE Lord Jones





NAME (wl) Aswan Engineering v Lupdine
CITATION Aswan Engineering v Lupdine [2013] EWCA Crim 257
CIT [2013] EWCA Crim 257
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Criminal Procedure Other Related Subjects: Sentencing; Burglary; Guilty Pleas; Houses; Indictments; Mistake; Sentencing Guidelines; Starting Point
ABSTRACT The appellants (H and L) applied for leave to appeal against their convictions for burglary of a dwelling. L applied for leave to appeal against his sentence of 10 months' imprisonment.
ABSTRACT H and L had entered pleas of guilty to an indictment charging them with an offence under the Theft Act 1968 s.9(1)(a). All concerned were aware that the building concerned was a dwelling, but the indictment did not specify that. When the error came to light, the judge granted permission to amend the indictment and ruled that the pleas should be vacated. H and L were then re-arraigned on the amended indictment and both pleaded guilty. L had 47 previous offences including a number of thefts and similar offences. In sentencing him, the judge found that the offence was a Category 2 burglary and, referring to his record, took a starting point of 15 months before giving full credit for the plea.
ABSTRACT H and L accepted that the judge had the power to allow the amendment to the indictment but submitted that the convictions were unsafe because the court did not have jurisdiction to vacate the guilty pleas without an application by a defendant. L submitted that the offence should have been assessed as a Category 3 burglary.
SUMMARY Where an indictment for an offence of burglary erroneously failed to specify that the building in question was a dwelling, the court had jurisdiction to vacate pleas entered by the defendants and allow the indictment to be amended without the need for an application by one of the defendants.
HELD Applications refused
HELD Applications refused. (1) The court had to have the power to vacate the guilty pleas in the absence of an application by H and L or on their behalf. In any event, the judge could have dealt with the case by offering H and L an opportunity to vacate their pleas but allowing their pleas to stand as pleas to the amended indictment if they did not wish to vacate them. In substance, that was exactly the position that was reached by the alternative route adopted in the instant case, namely vacating the pleas and allowing H and L to enter fresh pleas, R. v W considered. H and L unequivocally accepted their guilt of the offence particularised in the amended indictment and there was nothing to cast the remotest doubt on the safety of their convictions (see paras 11-13 of judgment). (2) The judge was entitled to treat the offence as a Category 2 burglary. Taking everything into account, particularly L's antecedents, the starting point and sentence after full credit for the plea were not arguably excessive (para.17).
JUDGE Richards LJ; Globe J; Judge Kramer QC
COUNSEL For the applicants: Andrew Morris. For the Crown: Gareth Patterson.





NAME (wl) Worsley v Tambrands
CITATION Worsley v Tambrands [2016] EWCOP 21
CIT [2016] EWCOP 21
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure Other Related Subjects: Administration of Justice; Human Rights; Media and Entertainment; Anonymity; Capacity; Death; Duration; Freedom of Expression; Injunctions; Life-Sustaining Treatment; Press; Reporting Restrictions; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life
ABSTRACT The Court of Protection considered its jurisdiction to make a reporting restrictions order after the subject of the proceedings had died, and after previous reporting restrictions orders had ended.
ABSTRACT The deceased was a 50-year-old woman who had refused life-saving treatment. The case had attracted much media attention. The woman was a socialite, described in the press as wanting to die because she thought she had "lost her sparkle" and did not want to grow old. During Court of Protection proceedings to determine her capacity to refuse treatment there had been a reporting restrictions order expressed to be effective during her lifetime. After the death, media interest increased. A seven-day interim extension was granted on the basis that there was no public interest in the woman or her family being identified. At the instant hearing, an adult daughter applied for a further reporting restrictions order. It was agreed that an order was appropriate, but its duration was disputed. Issues arose as to the court's general approach to granting such orders, particularly regarding the balance to be struck between ECHR art.8 and art.10.
SUMMARY Reporting restrictions orders made by the Court of Protection in serious medical treatment cases could extend beyond the death of the subject of those proceedings. There was no presumption or default position that such orders should end when the subject died. The court considered the general approach which it should take to granting such orders.
HELD Application granted.
HELD (1) The court had jurisdiction to make the order. Reporting restrictions orders in serious medical treatment cases could extend beyond the death of the subject of those proceedings. There was no presumption or default position that such orders should end when the subject died, Meek, Re [2014] EWCOP 1, [2014] C.O.P.L.R. 535 and Press Association v Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals Foundation Trust [2014] EWCOP 6, [2014] C.O.P.L.R. 502 applied (see paras 9.1, 9.11, 98-108, 144-145 of judgment).
HELD (2) The duration of the order would be "until further order of the court". There was no reason to order that reporting restrictions should terminate on the youngest daughter's 18th birthday, as submitted by the respondent media organisations, as the two adult daughters also had valid art.8 rights which were engaged (paras 9.2, 9.14, 110-118, 142-143,167-169, 178-180).
HELD (3) Balancing art.8 and art.10 was a case-sensitive exercise. Care should be taken in transporting comment on the weight of rival factors from one type of case to another, S (A Child) (Identification: Restrictions on Publication), Re [2004] UKHL 47, [2005] 1 A.C. 593 applied and C v Secretary of State for Justice [2016] UKSC 2, [2016] 1 W.L.R. 444 considered (paras 9.3, 43, 69-73).
HELD (4) The first step was to consider whether there was a good reason for a public hearing. That was not an isolated or preliminary stage that, if such a good reason existed, would found an approach that the second stage was addressed on the premise the Court of Protection proceedings were treated in the same way as other proceedings where the default rule was that they were heard in public (para.9.4, 79-80, 90).
HELD (5) The default rule that Court of Protection hearings were held in private represented a general conclusion on how best to administer justice. Neither art.8 nor art.10 took precedence so it would be wrong to approach the default rule as creating a presumption. Rather it was part of the structure for a reasoning process which applied the approach in S (A Child) to a given case (paras 9.5, 80, 91-92).
HELD (6) In most cases, the important safeguards secured by a public hearing could be secured without identifying the people involved. Generally the court should ask (a) whether there were good reasons for a public hearing; (b) if so, whether there should be reporting restrictions; (c) how effective restrictions might be in promoting art 8 rights and how restrictive they would be of art.10 rights; (d) if the hearing was to be in public, what reporting restrictions should be imposed, and if the hearing was to be in private, what documents should be made public (paras 9.6, 9.7, 84-85, 96).
HELD (7) Hearings would almost always be in public because of the benefits of open justice (paras 9.8, 97).
HELD (8) Owing to the rival propositions relating to anonymisation, the court had to distinguish between cases falling within the default position of allowing media access, and cases where media access was restricted. The weight to be given to the general propositions regarding naming, and the court's conclusion about what best promoted the administration of justice in any given case, would vary. They would often be taken into account in the context of (a) the validity of the reasons for the application, and (b) the impact of departing from the general conclusion on what generally promoted the administration of justice. Those reasons and that impact would need to be identified (paras 9.9, 9.10, 78, 95).
HELD (9) In the instant case it should have been clear to anyone with compassion that the focus of the reporting would, and did, add greatly to the distress of the deceased's daughters, one of whom was still at school. Much of the publicity had been precipitated by a wish not only to report the bases on which the court reached its decision, but to attract prurient interest in the deceased's sexual and relationship history. It was obvious that naming or otherwise identifying the deceased would increase the family's distress. Their art.8 rights were engaged, not least because the investigatory jurisdiction of the Court of Protection had invaded their private and family lives. (para.9.13, 29-35, 43, 74-77, 130-143).
JUDGE Charles J
COUNSEL For the applicant: Richard Spearman QC, Vikram Sachdeva QC, Victoria Butler-Cole. For the respondents: Adam Wolanski.





NAME (wl) Richardson v LRC Products Ltd
CITATION Richardson v LRC Products Ltd [2016] EWHC 569 (QB)
CIT [2016] EWHC 569 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Personal Injury Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Local Government; Anti-Social Behaviour; Breach of Duty of Care; Children'S Welfare; Disabled Persons; Local Authorities' Powers and Duties; Negligence; Personal Injury
ABSTRACT Two children appealed by their litigation friend against the striking out of their claims for damages in negligence against the local authority.
ABSTRACT Both children were minors and one was severely disabled and a protected party. They had both suffered prolonged abuse, and anti-social and criminal behaviour perpetrated by members of a family who lived on the same council estate. That family had been reported to the local authority for causing trouble before the children and their mother moved in. Their claim was struck out on the basis that there was no common law duty of care imposed by the Children Act 1989.
ABSTRACT It was submitted for the children that the master had wrongly struck out their claims on the ground that no duty of care arose, in reliance on the case of X (Minors) v Bedfordshire CC [1995] 2 A.C. 633 and the Tenth Edition of "Charlesworth & Percy on Negligence".
ABSTRACT 
SUMMARY Claims by children for negligence against a local authority had been wrongly struck out and were reinstated. Such claims formed an exception to the general rule that public authorities which failed to perform their duties owed no duty of care in negligence towards individuals who had suffered harm.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD The principal issue was whether the decision in JD v East Berkshire Community Health NHS Trust [2003] EWCA Civ 1151, [2004] Q.B. 558 had been impliedly overruled by Mitchell v Glasgow City Council [2009] UKHL 11, [2009] 1 A.C. 874 or Michael v Chief Constable of South Wales [2015] UKSC 2, [2015] A.C. 1732. Since the decision in X v Bedfordshire , which had been reached on policy grounds, JD v East Berkshire had reviewed the impact of the Human Rights Act 1998 on the common law principles of negligence and had determined that when considering a child's claim in negligence the court had to take into account their rights under the ECHR. Further, following developments in domestic jurisprudence, the effect of the X v Bedfordshire case was restricted to the core proposition that decisions by a local authority whether or not to take a child into care were not reviewable by way of a claim in negligence, JD v East Berkshire followed. The references to JD v East Berkshire in para.7 of Mitchell and in Michael were all to the appeals of the parents and did not affect the dicta of the Court of Appeal in the cases concerning the children, except for para.191 in Michael where in the dissenting judgment of Baroness Hale she had accepted that JD v East Berkshire provided an exception to the general rule that public authorities which failed to perform their duties did not owe a duty of care in negligence towards individuals who suffered harm thereby. As neither Mitchell nor Michael had implicitly overruled JD v East Berkshire, it remained binding authority, Mitchell and Michael considered. The children's claims had been wrongly struck out and were reinstated (see paras 40-44 of judgment).
JUDGE Slade J
COUNSEL For the claimant: Elizabeth-Anne Gumbel QC, Iain O'Donnell. For the defendant: Paul Stagg.





NAME (wl) A and others v National Blood Authority
CITATION A and others v National Blood Authority [2001] EWHC Admin 554
CIT [2001] EWHC Admin 554
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Criminal Law; Ec Law; Football; Free Movement of Persons; Human Rights; Proportionality; Public Order Offences
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Banning orders under the Football Spectators Act 1989 s.14A and s.14B as amended by the Football (Disorder) Act 2000 were not "penalties" for the purposes of the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.7 and the banning regime did not constitute a violation of EC law standards of procedural fairness.
SUMMARY G and others appealed against, and M sought judicial review of, orders banning them from travelling overseas to attend football matches. It was contended that such orders imposed under the Football Spectators Act 1989 s.14A and s.14B, as amended by the Football (Disorder) Act 2000, were "penalties" for the purposes of the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.7 and that the banning regime contravened EC law provisions relating to freedom of movement.
HELD dismissing the appeal and refusing the application for judicial review, that football banning orders were not "penalties" for the purposes of Art.7, since the purpose of such orders was to protect the general public from football violence, not to inflict punishment on the individuals concerned, Welch v United Kingdom (A/307-A) (1995) 20 E.H.R.R. 247 considered. Moreover, the banning regime did not constitute a violation of EC law. The EC Treaty Art.46, which authorised special treatment for foreign nationals, served to implicitly endorse the recognition that a Member State was justified, on public policy grounds, in imposing restrictions on its own nationals. The United Kingdom was entitled to its view that banning orders were a proportionate response to football violence.
JUDGE Laws LJ; Poole J
COUNSEL For G and S: Rhodri Thompson and Jessica Simor. For M: Alan Newman Q.C. and Timothy Moloney. For L: Alan Newman Q.C. and Scott Wilson. For the Chief Constable: Philip Havers Q.C. and Simon Davenport. For the prosecution: Philip Havers Q.C., Simon Davenport and James Hargan. For the Secretary of State: David Pannick Q.C. and Mark Hoskins. For the magistrates court: Not represented.





NAME (wl) Bogle v McDonald's Restaurants Ltd
CITATION Bogle v McDonald's Restaurants Ltd [2002] EWHC 490 (QB)
CIT [2002] EWHC 490 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Beverages; Consumer Safety; Directives; Duty of Care; Ec Law; Negligence; Restaurants; Warnings
SUMMARY McDonald's was not negligent in serving hot drinks at the temperature that it did or in providing such drinks in the cups and lids that it did.
JUDGE Field J
COUNSEL For B: Tim Horlock Q.C. and Christopher Kennedy. For M: Kate Thirlwall Q.C. and Simon King.





NAME (wl) Pollard v Tesco Stores
CITATION Pollard v Tesco Stores [2006] EWCA Civ 393
CIT [2006] EWCA Civ 393
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Consumer Law Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Bottles; Consumer Protection; Consumer Safety; Defects; Foreseeability
SUMMARY Consumer protection; Bottles; Child resistant closure caps; Defective caps
SUMMARY The appellants (T) appealed against a decision granting judgment in favour of the respondent (C) in a personal injury action. C, who was 13 months old at the time, was injured when he ingested dishwasher powder from a plastic bottle. The powder had been purchased from the first appellant, but the bottle had been manufactured by the second appellant. The claim against T was that the bottle and cap had been defective so that the cap was easier to detach than it should have been. The cap was a child resistant closure (CRC) cap. T joined C's mother (P) to the action on the basis of their claim that she had left the bottle in a place where C could see and reach it, and had left the cap off or not properly screwed up. The judge found T liable and acquitted P of any negligence. The judge held that, having elected to fit a CRC cap to the bottle, the consumer was entitled to expect the cap to function at least up to the standard usually to be applied to CRCs, namely the British Standard certificate. He held that there was a defect in the cap for a number of reasons, in particular that there had been play between the cap and screw and very much less torque was required to open it. He accordingly held T liable in negligence at common law and under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 . T argued that the judge had erred in finding them liable. In the event that the appeal was allowed, C, challenging the judge's exoneration of P, argued that (1) it must have been foreseeable that a child would be liable to suffer injury if he got access to the contents of the bottle; (2) under the 1987 Act, the public was entitled to expect that the product would function to the full extent of the design standard to which it was manufactured, which in the instant case meant the same as compliance with the British Standard torque measure. C submitted that given that a CRC cap was advisedly put onto the bottle design for safety reasons, s.3 of the 1987 Act sufficed to import the British Standard torque measure into the content of general public expectation.
HELD allowing the appeal and dismissing the cross appeal, that (1) this was a case of breach of statutory duty or nothing. One aspect of the factual scenario which, having exonerated P, the judge accepted, was that it was surely not reasonably foreseeable that this injury would happen as he found it did. In a case such as the instant, any calculation of foreseeability had to assume that the child's parents would take steps in the home to prevent the child having access to the bottle. Every case must be judged by the colour of its own facts and, in the instant case, foreseeability could not be got out of the fact that it proved possible for C to open the bottle coupled with the fact that the British Standard certificate was not met. Accordingly, the case turned upon whether there was a breach of the 1987 Act. (2) The test as to whether a product had a defect under the 1987 Act was what persons generally were entitled to expect. Persons were generally entitled to expect that the bottle in the instant case would be more difficult to open than if it had an ordinary screwtop. Anything more specific, as a test of public expectation, ran into difficulties. The bottle was more difficult to open than an ordinary screwtop, though not as difficult as it would have been if the British Standard torque measure had been complied with. Thus, there was no breach of the 1987 Act. (3) The judge was entitled to accept P's account of events and he was entitled to reach his conclusions as to the way the accident happened.
JUDGE Laws LJ; Wilson LJ; Sir Paul Kennedy
COUNSEL For the appellants: John Norman. For the respondent: Timothy Briden. For the cross-appellant: Neil Block QC.





NAME (wl) Piper v JRI (Manufacturing) Ltd
CITATION Piper v JRI (Manufacturing) Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 1344
CIT [2006] EWCA Civ 1344
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Consumer Law; Damages; Defective Products; Defects; Hip Joint; Issues; Medical Equipment
SUMMARY defective products; medical equipment; defects in hip prosthesis; time when damage occurred
SUMMARY The appellant (P) appealed against a decision dismissing his claim for damages against the respondent prosthetics manufacturer (J). P had had a total hip replacement operation that involved the implantation of a prosthesis supplied by J. After the operation, the prosthesis sheared in two and it had to be removed and replaced, which resulted in P losing a significant amount of mobility. P brought an action for damages claiming that J was strictly liable under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 . On examination of the prosthesis after it was removed, two defects were found. At trial, it was J's case that their manufacturing and inspection process was such that the prosthesis had no defect when they supplied it to the hospital, and it was most likely that the defect occurred when the prosthesis was implanted. It was P's case that the defects found on examination of the prosthesis after the fracture were caused during the explantation of the prosthesis, and those defects or at least one of them had covered up a pre-existing surface point defect which had initiated the fracture, and which had been present prior to implantation. The trial judge's conclusion was that it was not possible to say precisely when the damage to the prosthesis was caused, but that the more likely time would have been at explantation rather than implantation. The judge found that the prosthesis left J's factory without any defects, so that J succeeded in establishing the statutory defence under s.4 of the 1987 Act. P submitted that (1) the judge had erred in his analysis of the evidence in reaching his determination based on the evidence as to the surface point defect and manufacturing process; (2) the judge should have considered P's alternative case that J had produced a prosthesis which was defective in that a surface point defect, capable of initiating a fracture, could be caused during the ordinary course of implantation.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that (1) any imperfections which arose during the machining and polishing process would have been identified at or before the final inspection process. On a visual inspection, a surface defect of 35 microns or more could be detected. There was no evidence to suggest that the surface point defect that initiated the fracture was smaller than 35 microns; therefore the system was capable of detecting the defect. It could be inferred that the defect would have been detected had it been present prior to delivery at the hospital. The judge had been correct to find that the prosthesis was not defective at the time it was supplied to the hospital. (2) P had raised his alternative case in the pleadings, but had not pursued it because the judge had indicated that he was not impressed by it. It was important for parties to identify the issues to which the evidence was to be directed and in relation to which the trial was to be conducted. Once P chose not to pursue his alternative case, it was not incumbent on J to deal with it. The court, on appeal, could not deal with the issues raised in the alternative case.
JUDGE Mummery LJ; Thomas LJ; Maurice Kay LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Simeon Maskrey QC. For the respondent: RF Owen QC, Toby Stewart.





NAME (wl) Lennon v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis
CITATION Lennon v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2004] EWCA Civ 130
CIT [2004] EWCA Civ 130
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Police; Advice; Assumption of Responsibility; Economic Loss; Police Officers
SUMMARY It was fair, just and reasonable to impose on the police commissioner a duty of care to give advice to an officer in his force to protect him from economic loss.
SUMMARY The defendant Commissioner appealed against a judgment that he was liable in negligence for pure economic loss suffered by the claimant (L) as a result of the failure of an employee (B) to give L advice. L was a serving police officer who was in non contractual relationship with the Commissioner akin to that of employment. B had handled the arrangements for L's transfer to another force. She had told him, in response to his specific inquiry, that his allowances would not be affected if he took time off work before starting with the new force. However, under the arrangements made by B, there was a break in the continuity of L's service with the result that he did not retain the benefit of a housing allowance. L argued that, as a result of B's failure to give proper advice, he had suffered loss of entitlement to the housing allowance and the Commissioner was vicariously liable for the handling of arrangements for his transfer. The judge held that the Commissioner had breached a duty of care owed to L to arrange the transfer, including the giving of advice, so as to ensure that he did not lose his allowances. The Commissioner submitted (1) the judge's radical departure from the existing law; (2) B was not a professional adviser and was not under any positive duty to give L advice about the choice of a leaving date; (3) it was not fair, just or reasonable to impose on an employer a decision which involved a general duty of care to give advice to an employee in order to protect them from economic loss and the same reasoning should apply to the relationship between himself and L, Outram v Academy Plastics Ltd [2001] I.C.R. 367 cited. L argued that the judge had correctly applied the principle in Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd [1964] A.C. 465.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that (1) no new category of duty situation had been created by the judge's decision. The particular facts found by the judge brought the case within the Hedley Byrne principle. It was well established that liability in tort for pure economic loss could arise from the negligent carrying out of a task undertaken pursuant to an express voluntary assumption of responsibility, on which L had relied, Hedley Byrne applied. (2) It did not matter that B was not a professional adviser, Spring v Guardian Assurance Plc [1995] 2 A.C. 296 applied, since she had expressly assumed responsibility in L's transfer for giving him advice in relation to the loss of the housing allowance, which he had expressly raised with her. B had, or had access to, special complex knowledge concerning the effect of transfers on service allowances of that kind and she had led L to believe that he could leave it to her. She had not told him to seek advice elsewhere. Those features of the case were sufficient to attract a duty to give him advice in respect of the very type of loss about which he had expressed his concern to her and which he had actually suffered as a result of her failure to advise him. (3) L had not invoked a general contractual duty of care positively to give advice to protect him from economic loss, Outram v Academy Plastics distinguished. There was nothing in the case to prevent the Hedley Byrne principle from applying to an omission to give advice in the circumstances, even though the parties were in a relationship akin to that of employer and employee.
JUDGE Ward LJ; Mummery LJ; Rix LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Timothy Pitt-Payne. For the respondent: Gavin Millar QC, Anthony Hudson.





NAME (wl) Esso Petroleum v Mardon
CITATION Esso Petroleum v Mardon [1976] QB 801
CIT [1976] QB 801
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Contracts Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Contracts; Misrepresentation; Negligence
FLAGS Criticised
SUMMARY Negligence; negligent mis-statement; duty of care; special relationship in pre-contract negotiations
SUMMARY Where a special relationship exists, a negligent mis-statement may be not only a breach of contractual warranty, but also an actionable tort as a breach of the duty of care which exists throughout pre-contractual negotiations and which survives the making of the ultimate contract. Esso granted a tenancy of a new filling station to D. During negotiations they told him that they estimated an annual "throughput" of petrol at 200,000 gallons a year by the third year. Due to the physical characteristics and layout of the site, the figure after three years was still under 100,000. D lost all his money. He entered into a new tenancy with Esso at a reduced rent plus a surcharge on petrol sold. The losses continued and D was unable to pay cash for the petrol. Esso cut off his supplies and eventually he had to surrender possession. He counterclaimed for breach of warranty, and for negligent misrepresentation.
HELD (1) the statement as to potential throughput was a contractual warranty, and the plaintiffs were liable for damages for its breach; (2) the statement was a negligent representation made by a party holding himself out as having special expertise in circumstances where a duty of care existed to take care that it was correct; (3) the measure of damage in both cases was the same, i.e. what D had lost by being induced to enter into the contract, which should be assessed on the same lines as damages for personal injuries to include estimated loss of earnings. ( Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd [1964] A.C. 465 applied Bisset v Wilkinson [1927] A.C. 177 distinguished).
JUDGE Lord Denning MR; Ormrod LJ; Shaw LJ





NAME (wl) James McNaughton Paper Group Ltd v Hicks Anderson & Co
CITATION James McNaughton Paper Group Ltd v Hicks Anderson & Co [1991] 2 QB 113
CIT [1991] 2 QB 113
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Accountants; Duty of Care; Professional Negligence; Take Overs
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Duty of care; preparation of company's accounts; accountants' duty to takeover bidder; whether duty owed
SUMMARY HA, accountants to the MK Paper Group (MK), appealed against the finding that they owed a duty of care, when preparing accounts, to JMPG, a firm considering taking over MK. JMPG suggested that the valuation of MK's shares for the purpose of the take over should be made on values certified by MK's accountants and examined by JMPG's auditors. The chairman of MK asked HA to prepare the annual accounts as quickly as possible. Draft accounts were provided to MK's chairman who then passed on the information to JMPG. The take over went ahead. When JMPG's accountants subsequently discovered errors in the accounts, an action in negligence was brought for loss and damage suffered in the take over.
HELD Appeal allowed. JMPG should not have relied on the draft accounts without having them examined by their own accountants. The circumstances in which the necessary relationship between the maker of a statement and the recipient might be held to exist as defined in Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605, were considered and applied. HA could not have foreseen that JMPG would treat the accounts as final without further examination and in the circumstances JMPG had been unable to prove that a duty of care was owed to it by HA.
JUDGE Neill LJ; Nourse LJ; Balcombe LJ





NAME (wl) Customs and Excise Commissioners v Barclays Bank
CITATION Customs and Excise Commissioners v Barclays Bank [2007] UKHL 28
CIT [2007] UKHL 28
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Real Property Other Related Subjects: Road Traffic; Dedication; Highways; Intention; Landowners; Public Rights of Way; Statutory Interpretation; Sufficiency of Evidence
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT An issue arose in joined cases as to the effect of the presumption in the Highways Act 1980 s.31(1).
ABSTRACT The appellants in both cases claimed that land owned by the respondents had achieved the status of a public path by 20 years' public user. The cases turned on whether the landowners had shown "sufficient evidence" that they had no intention during the relevant 20-year period to dedicate the land as a public path. The issues for determination were (i) whether the "intention" in s.31(1) had to be communicated contemporaneously to members of the public using the way, or whether an intention held by the landowner but not revealed to anybody could constitute "sufficient evidence"; (ii) whether the phrase "during that period" in the proviso to s.31(1) meant "during the whole of that period" or "at some point during that period".
SUMMARY Under the Highways Act 1980 s.31(1) there could only be "sufficient evidence" that a landowner had no intention to dedicate a path as a public way if the landowner performed overt acts so that the relevant audience, namely the users of the way, would reasonably have understood his intention.
HELD Appeals allowed.
HELD (1) Upon the true construction of s.31(1), "intention" meant what the relevant audience, namely the users of the way, would reasonably have understood the landowner's intention to be. The law as stated by Denning L.J. in Fairey v Southampton CC [1956] 2 Q.B. 439 and Hobhouse L.J. in Secretary of State for the Environment v Beresford Trustees [1996] N.P.C. 128 was correct, Fairey and Beresford applied. The test was objective: the reasonable user would have to understand that the landowner was intending to disabuse him of the notion that the land was a public highway. Outside the criminal law and parts of the law of torts, it was common to use the word "intention" in an objective sense. The Court of Appeal had taken too narrow a view of the purpose and effect of the proviso. It had been drafted against the background of the common law. The presumption of dedication at common law involved a dialogue between the landowner and the public. A landowner had to communicate his intention to the public in some way if he was to satisfy the requirements of the proviso, Mann v Brodie (1885) 10 App. Cas. 378 considered and Folkstone Corp v Brockman [1914] A.C. 338 superseded. Furthermore, if an uncommunicated intention sufficed to satisfy the proviso, then the elaborate and time-consuming measures provided for in s.31(3) to s.31(6) would have no point. (2) The phrase "during that period" in the proviso to s.31(1) meant "at some point during that period". The intention not to dedicate did not have to be continuously demonstrated for the whole 20-year period, R. v Secretary of State for the Environment Ex p. Blake [1984] J.P.L. 101 and Merstham Manor Ltd v Coulsdon and Purley Urban DC [1937] 2 K.B. 77 considered.
JUDGE Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Scott of Foscote; Baroness Hale of Richmond; Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury
COUNSEL For the appellants: George Laurence QC, Ross Crail. For the respondents: Timothy Mould QC, David Blundell. For the interveners: Edwin Simpson.





NAME (wl) Patchett v Swimming Pool Trades Association
CITATION Patchett v Swimming Pool Trades Association [2009] EWCA Civ 717
CIT [2009] EWCA Civ 717
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence Other Related Subjects: Information Technology; Assumption of Responsibility; Duty of Care; Economic Loss; Negligent Misstatement; Proximity; Reliance; Websites
ABSTRACT The appellants (P) appealed against a decision that the respondent trade association (S) did not owe P a duty of care in respect of certain statements made on S's website.
ABSTRACT S was an incorporated trade association for swimming pool installers. P were looking for a contractor to build them a swimming pool in the garden of their home. They obtained details of installers from S's website. They contracted with one installer (C). C was only an affiliate member of S and as such was not subject to the same vetting as a full member and was not subject to S's bond and warranty scheme. C began the work but became insolvent and did not complete it. P had the work completed by other contractors. P's case was that C did not carry out the work with reasonable skill and care. P's claim was for the cost of completing the work plus the amount paid to C less the amount they would have paid to C if it had completed the contract. P brought proceedings against S to recover their financial loss alleging negligent misstatement. They claimed that they had relied on statements on S's website which were inaccurate and misleading because C was not a full member of S, was not a competent contractor, became insolvent and provided installations which did not benefit from S's warranty scheme. The judge held that S did not owe a duty of care to P essentially because, although S knew that the representations on the website would be likely to be acted upon by people like P, it would not expect them to do so without further enquiry.
SUMMARY In all the circumstances it could not fairly be held that a trade association had assumed a legal responsibility to the claimants for the accuracy of the statements in its website without the further enquiry which the website itself urged.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (Smith LJ dissenting) S had not owed P a duty of care in the circumstances. S had made representations on its website which it had expected, or at least hoped and reasonably foreseen, would be acted upon by people like P, including representations that those on its members list would have the benefits of membership because there was no indication that there were different types of member. However, it was necessary to look at the statements made on the website as a whole, and those statements had included reference to an information pack supplied by S. S could reasonably have expected potential customers to have regard to all the information potentially available from the website and not just part of it, and to obtain an information pack. If P had asked for the information pack and the list of members referred to on the website, it would have become immediately apparent that C was not a full member and was not covered by the warranty scheme. In all the circumstances it could not fairly be held that S had assumed a legal responsibility to the claimants for the accuracy of the statements in its website without the further enquiry which the website itself had urged, Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd [1964] A.C. 465 and Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605 considered. There had been no assumption of responsibility because the degree of reliance which S had intended or should reasonably have expected would be placed on the accuracy of the statements on its website was limited by the advice that potential customers should obtain an information pack. In the circumstances there had not been a sufficient relationship of proximity between S and P to give rise to a duty of care and it would not be fair, just and reasonable to hold that S had owed them a duty to take care, Customs and Excise Commissioners v Barclays Bank Plc [2006] UKHL 28, [2007] 1 A.C. 181 followed. To hold that S had owed a duty of care to P would not be only a small increment or development from existing case law. The mere fact that the representations had been contained on a website did not support the conclusion that a duty of care was owed; all depended on the circumstances.
JUDGE Lord Clarke MR; Scott Baker LJ; Smith LJ
COUNSEL For the appellants: Jamie McCracken. For the respondents: George Woods.





NAME (wl) St Helens Smelting Co v Tipping
CITATION St Helens Smelting Co v Tipping [2015] UKSC 69
CIT [2015] UKSC 69
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Administrative Law Other Related Subjects: Human Rights; Armed Forces; Army; Attacking Civilian Population; Colonies; Common Law; Customary Law; Death; Jurisdiction; Public Inquiries; Right to Life; Time
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellants (K) appealed against a decision ([2014] EWCA Civ 312, [2015] Q.B. 57) that the respondent secretaries of state were not required to hold a public inquiry into the deaths of 24 unarmed civilians killed by British soldiers in colonial Malaya in 1948. The secretaries of state cross-appealed on the basis that the claim was outside the jurisdiction of the UK courts.
ABSTRACT The British soldiers had been sent to Malaya to combat an insurgency. Shortly after the incident, an official report stated that the civilians who were killed were detained bandits who had been trying to escape. K were witnesses and relatives of the deceased. They alleged that the civilians had been deliberately executed. The secretaries of state refused K's requests for an inquiry into the killings. The issues were whether (i) the UK courts had jurisdiction to determine the claim; (ii) an inquiry was required under ECHR art.2; (iii) the secretaries of state had a duty to investigate under customary international law; (iv) the decision not to order an inquiry under the Inquiries Act 2005 could be challenged by judicial review.
SUMMARY The UK Government was not obliged to hold a public inquiry into the deaths of 24 civilians killed by British soldiers in colonial Malaya in 1948. The lapse of time meant that there was no requirement to hold an inquiry under ECHR art.2. Further, such a duty could not be implied into common law under principles of customary international law and the decision not to hold an inquiry under the Inquiries Act 2005 s.1 was not open to challenge on judicial review principles.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (Lady Hale dissenting) (1) It was not open to the secretaries of state to assert that the acts of the British soldiers were not attributable to the UK. While on active service in Malaya, the soldiers remained under the command of the Crown. There was no question of their secondment to any other authority. The secretaries of state could not argue that any liabilities of the Crown had passed to the Federation of Malaya when it became independent in 1957. Even if responsibility for the deaths had transferred to the Federation under the Federal Constitution of 1957, that could not affect any domestic law duty which the UK would otherwise have towards victims of prior misconduct by the British army. The general rule was that state liability for a death remained with the state responsible for the deaths and did not pass to a state which took over the relevant territory or activities (see paras 178, 187-197 of judgment). (2) (Lord Kerr and Lady Hale agreeing that the art.2 claim should fail but dissenting in relation to when the critical date was) The ECHR did not bind a contracting party in relation to any act or fact which took place before the ECHR had entered into force with respect to that party (the "critical date"). However, according to the principles set out in Janowiec v Russia (55508/07) (2014) 58 E.H.R.R. 30 a duty to investigate could arise under art.2 where two criteria were satisfied. In the instant case, the first criterion was satisfied: there had been relevant "acts or omissions" after the critical date because there had been no full or public investigation of the killings and compelling evidence had come to light suggesting that they were unlawful. However, the second criterion had not been satisfied: there was no "genuine connection" between the deaths and the critical date. The critical date was 1966, when the UK first recognised the right to petition the European Court of Human Rights, rather than 1953 when the ECHR came into force in the UK. The killings occurred more than 10 years before the critical date and there was therefore no genuine connection, Janowiec , Silih v Slovenia (71463/01) (2009) 49 E.H.R.R. 37 and Varnava v Turkey (16064/90) (2010) 50 E.H.R.R. 21 applied. The claim under art.2 had to fail (paras 70-87). (3) By 1948, it had not been established that international law required a formal public investigation into a suspicious death, even if there were strong reasons for believing that a war crime had been committed. Even if such a duty had been imposed by customary international law, it had to be subject to a cut-off date and it was inconceivable that it could be treated as retrospective to events which occurred more than 40 years earlier. In any event, if international law did require such an investigation, that requirement could not be implied into the common law. Parliament had expressly provided for investigations into deaths through the coroners' courts and through the 2005 Act. It had also incorporated art.2 through the Human Rights Act 1998. In those circumstances, it would be inappropriate for the courts to impose a further duty to hold an inquiry, particularly with such potentially wide and uncertain ramifications, McKerr's Application for Judicial Review, Re [2004] UKHL 12, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 807 applied (paras 112-122). (4) (Lady Hale dissenting) In exercising their statutory discretion under s.1 of the 2005 Act, the secretaries of state had clearly considered the request for an inquiry seriously and had rejected it for defensible and relevant reasons. It was impossible to characterise their conclusion as unreasonable or irrational. The decision could not be impugned. It was not appropriate to determine K's arguments that the time had come to recognise proportionality, rather than rationality, as a basis for challenging administrative decisions. The issue had potentially profound and wide implications and would need to be argued before a panel of nine Justices. However, such a course was unnecessary because the appeal would fail even if it was based on proportionality (paras 127-129, 132). (Per Lady Hale) The decision not to hold an inquiry was not one which a reasonable authority could have reached. The secretaries of state had not taken account of all the possible purposes and benefits of such an inquiry. The value of establishing the truth was overwhelming (paras 309-313).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lady Hale DPSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Kerr JSC; Lord Hughes JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Michael Fordham QC, Danny Friedman QC, Zachary Douglas QC. For the respondents: Jonathan Crow QC, James Eadie QC, Jason Coppel QC, Marcus Pilgerstorfer, Amy Rogers. For the interveners: Ben Emmerson QC, Adam Straw.





NAME (wl) Coventry v Lawrence
CITATION Coventry v Lawrence [2014] UKSC 13
CIT [2014] UKSC 13
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance; Damages; Injunctions; Noise; Planning Permission; Prescription; Remedies
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellants (L) appealed against a decision ([2012] EWCA Civ 26, [2012] 1 W.L.R. 2127) that activities on land close to their home did not constitute a nuisance.
ABSTRACT The first respondent (C) was the operator of a stadium, constructed in 1976, where speedway and stock-car racing had taken place. The second respondent (M) operated a motocross track at the rear of the stadium. Planning permissions covering the speedway racing and motocross activities had been granted, while a certificate of lawful use covered the stock-car racing. In 2006, L moved into a bungalow located near the stadium. The judge at first instance upheld their claim that noise coming from the stadium and track amounted to a nuisance, but the judge's finding was reversed on appeal. The instant appeal raised the following issues: (i) the extent, if any, to which it was open to a defendant to argue that he had established a prescriptive right to commit what would otherwise be a nuisance by means of noise; (ii) the extent, if any, to which the defendant could rely on the fact that the claimant "came to the nuisance"; (iii) the extent, if any, to which it was open to the defendant to invoke the actual use of his premises when assessing the character of the locality; (iv) the extent, if any, to which the grant of planning permission for a particular use could affect the question of whether that use was a nuisance; (v) the approach to be adopted by a court when deciding whether to grant an injunction to restrain a nuisance or whether to award damages instead.
SUMMARY The Supreme Court set out the approach to be adopted when a court had to consider whether to award damages or grant an injunction in a nuisance case.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) In the light of the relevant principles, practical considerations and judicial dicta, it was possible to obtain by prescription a right to commit what would otherwise be a nuisance by noise (see para.41 of judgment). (2) It was no defence for a defendant sued in nuisance to argue that the claimant came to the nuisance, although it might well be a defence, at least in some circumstances, for a defendant to argue that, as it was only because the claimant had changed the use of, or built on, his land that the defendant's pre-existing activity was claimed to have become a nuisance, the claim should fail (para.58). (3) A defendant, faced with a contention that his activities gave rise to a nuisance, could rely on those activities as constituting part of the character of the locality, but only to the extent that they did not constitute a nuisance. Similarly, any other activity in the neighbourhood could properly be taken into account when assessing the character of the neighbourhood, to the extent that it did not give rise to an actionable nuisance or was otherwise unlawful (paras 74-75). (4) The mere fact that the activity which was said to give rise to the nuisance had the benefit of a planning permission would normally be of no assistance to the defendant in a claim brought by a neighbour who argued that the activity caused a nuisance to his land in the form of noise or other loss of amenity. Among other things, it was wrong in principle that, through the grant of a planning permission, a planning authority should be able to deprive a property-owner of a right to object to what would otherwise be a nuisance, without providing him with compensation, when there was no provision in the planning legislation which suggested such a possibility (paras 90, 94). (5) The court's power to award damages in lieu of an injunction involved a classic exercise of discretion, which should not, as a matter of principle, be fettered, although the prima facie position was that an injunction should be granted. As to the four tests set out Shelfer v City of London Electric Lighting Co (No.1) [1895] 1 Ch. 287, their application should not be such as to fetter the exercise of the court's discretion. However, it would, in the absence of additional relevant circumstances pointing the other way, normally be right to refuse an injunction if those four tests were satisfied. But the fact that those tests were not all satisfied would not mean that an injunction should be granted, Shelfer considered. The public interest, if it arose, would be a relevant factor; for example, a court would be entitled to have regard to the fact that many other neighbours in addition to the claimant were badly affected by the nuisance as a factor in favour of granting an injunction. In some cases, the grant of planning permission for a particular activity might provide strong support for the contention that the activity was of benefit to the public, which would be relevant to the question of whether or not to grant an injunction (paras 120-121, 123-125). (6) The application of the above principles justified the restoration of the injunction granted by the judge at first instance. Among other things, C and M had not shown that their activities during a period of 20 years amounted to a nuisance. To justify the establishment of a right to create a noise by prescription, it was not enough to show that the activity which now created the noise had been carried on for 20 years. It was not even enough to show that the activity had created a noise for 20 years. What had to be established was that the activity had created a nuisance over 20 years. However, under the "permission to apply" provision in the judge's order, C and M would be free to argue that the injunction should be discharged and damages awarded instead (paras 143, 148, 151).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Sumption JSC; Lord Carnwath JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Stephen Hockman QC, William Upton. For the respondents: Robert McCracken QC, Sebastian Kokelaar.





NAME (wl) British Celanese Ltd v AH Hunt (Capacitors) Ltd
CITATION British Celanese Ltd v AH Hunt (Capacitors) Ltd [1969] 1 WLR 959
CIT [1969] 1 WLR 959
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Negligence; Dangerous Escape; Economic Loss; Remoteness
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Dangerous things; escape of metal foil
SUMMARY As regards remoteness of damage there is no difference in principle between physical injury resulting in loss of profits and personal injury resulting in loss of earnings. P claimed damages against D, manufacturers of electrical components, alleging that in December 1964 metal foil strips blown from D's factory on the same industrial estate as P's factory came into contact with an electricity sub-station on the estate, causing a power failure which halted P's machines, resulted in material in them solidifying, necessitated the cleaning of the machines, and wasted materials and time. P alleged D knew or ought to have known of the likely consequences of the escape because a similar occurrence had taken place in 1961 and D had received a warning from the electricity board. P claimed damages under four heads - (a) strict liability under Rylands v Fletcher (b)negligence; (c) nuisance; and (d) public nuisance. D contended that nothing more than a damnum absque injuria was revealed. On the trial of a preliminary issue whether on the facts set out in the statement of claim, D was in law liable for the damage claimed, held, (1) that the claim under head (a) failed because there was no non-natural user of the land; (2) as to (b) that D owed a duty to P in the circumstances to prevent the metal foil being blown about so as to foul the sub-station and that, as to remoteness of damage, there was no difference between the present case of alleged physical injury with consequential loss of profits and the ordinary case of a plaintiff suffering physical injury and losing earnings; and (3) that as to (c) and (d), an isolated happening by itself could create an actionable nuisance and so, as P was directly and foreseeably affected, P had a good cause of action against D in nuisance. (Dictum of Lord Moulton in Rickards v Lothian [1913] A.C. 263 ; Read v J Lyons & Co Ltd [1947] A.C. 156 ; Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] A.C. 562 and Midwood & Co v Manchester Corp [1905] 2 K.B. 597 applied; Weller & Co v Foot & Mouth Disease Research Institute [1966] 1 Q.B. 569 ; Electrochrome Ltd v Welsh Plastics Ltd [1968] 2 All E.R. 205 and Seaway Hotels v Canada Cragg and Consumers Gas Co (1959) 17 D.L.R. (2d) 292 considered). [Leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal granted].
JUDGE Lawton J





NAME (wl) Crown River Cruises Ltd v Kimbolton Fireworks Ltd
CITATION Crown River Cruises Ltd v Kimbolton Fireworks Ltd [1996] 2 Lloyd's Rep 533
CIT [1996] 2 Lloyd's Rep 533
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Dangerous Escape; Negligence; Nuisance
SUMMARY Nuisance; damage to barge during firework display; whether actionable in private nuisance; rule in "Rylands v Fletcher" could extend to facts
SUMMARY C claimed in negligence, nuisance and under the rule in Rylands v Fletcher (1868) L.R. 3 H.L. 330 for damage caused to their floating barge and a passenger vessel moored alongside it following a firework display held by K on the River Thames. The fire authority had been called to a small fire on the barge caused by falling debris during the display and a second fire later damaged both the passenger vessel and the barge.
HELD giving judgment for C, that (1) K had been negligent in putting on the firework display without first checking whether any flammable material was on board the vessels in the vicinity, and expert evidence had shown that the second fire occurred because of the fire authority's negligent failure to ensure that the first fire was properly extinguished; (2) the barge was permanently moored and C owned a licence which gave them exclusive use and occupation. This meant that, as the barge was attached to the land, an action in private nuisance against K was sustainable as the display interfered with C's use and enjoyment of the land and (3) there was a case for extending the rule in Rylands v Fletcher to accumulations in a vessel on a river and to intentional releases, as well as accidental escape, provided the release was not deliberately intended to be aimed at the plaintiff's property. However, a finding of liability under Rylands v Fletcher was not made against K in this case.
JUDGE Potter J
COUNSEL For CRC: Timothy Brenton. For KF: Sebastian Neville-Clark. For the fire authority: Nigel Wilkinson Q.C. and Kerstin Boyd.





NAME (wl) Dennis v Ministry of Defence
CITATION Dennis v Ministry of Defence [2003] EWHC 793 (QB)
CIT [2003] EWHC 793 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance; Aircraft; Measure of Damages; Military Bases; Noise; Public Interest; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Noise emanating from military aircraft from a nearby military base flying over the claimants' property constituted a nuisance, but public interest demanded that the flying of the aircraft continue; however, damages for capital loss, loss of amenity and loss of commercial opportunities caused by the nuisance were assessed at GBP 950,000.
SUMMARY Noise caused by aircraft at a military base breaches the human rights of persons living nearby and constitutes a nuisance, but public interest demands that the flying of aircraft should continue. D, a husband and wife, applied for a declaration that noise emanating from a military base adjacent to their property constituted a nuisance and sought damages. D owned and lived on an estate adjacent to RAF Wittering, an operational aerodrome. Harrier squadrons trained at the military base and when landing flew directly over D's estate. D claimed that the noise levels were deafening when the Harriers were in the course of circuit training, particularly as they flew over D's estate at low altitude to land at the military base. D alleged that this constituted a nuisance at common law and/or infringed their human rights under the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.8 and Sch.1 Part II Art.1 and significantly reduced the market value of their estate. TheMoD argued that the flying activity was a necessary part of training pilots and was in the interests of national security and nothing could reasonably be done to improve the situation. The MoD claimed that in any event it had acquired the right to commit any nuisance by prescription since the harriers had been flying at the military base since 1969. The case raised the point of principle of whether and in what circumstances a sufficient public interest could amount to a defence to a claim in nuisance.
HELD granting the application in part, that whilst the noise emanating from the military base constituted a nuisance, the public interest demanded that the flying of the aircraft should continue. The flying of the harriers was not an ordinary use of land. Harrier training was only planned to continue at the base for a further nine years The defence of the realm and the cost and inconvenience of uprooting the military airbase meant that D's private rights were subjugated to the public interest. Public interest was to be considered but selected individuals were not to bear the cost of the public benefit. It was not proportionate to give effect to the public interest without compensating D. There had been an interference with D's human rights under Art.8 and Art.1 and an appropriate assessment of damages at common law would provide "just satisfaction" under the Human Rights Act 1998 s.8, Marcic v Thames Water Utilities Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 64, [2002] Q.B. 929 applied. Accordingly in this exceptional case damages assessed at GBP 950,000 were awarded for capital loss, loss of amenity and loss of commercial opportunities caused by the nuisance. The MoD had not acquired the right to commit any nuisance by prescription because D had neither consented to nor acquiesced in the nuisance.
JUDGE Buckley J
COUNSEL For D: Derek Wood Q.C. and David Hart. For the Ministry: David Elvin Q.C. and William Hoskins.





NAME (wl) Marcic v Thames Water Utilities Ltd
CITATION Marcic v Thames Water Utilities Ltd [2003] UKHL 66
CIT [2003] UKHL 66
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Human Rights; Utilities; Breach of Statutory Duty; Director General of Water Services; Floods; Nuisance; Protection of Property; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life; Sewerage; Sewerage Undertakers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY The claimant, whose property had been subject to flooding as a result of overloaded sewers, did not have a common law action in nuisance against the defendant as to allow such an action would set at nought the comprehensive statutory scheme laid down in the Water Industry Act 1991. The claim under the Human Rights Act 1998 was ill-founded and the statutory scheme complied with the European Convention on Human Rights.
SUMMARY T, a sewerage undertaker, appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 64, [2002] Q.B. 929) that it was liable for failing to prevent flooding to M's property caused by the back flow of foul water from its sewerage system. M's property was regularly flooded by reason of overloaded sewers. The flooding was not due to any failure on T's part to clean or maintain the sewers but was, rather, due to a significant increase in the volume of sewage entering the sewers since the time of their construction. T had no control over the volume of sewage entering the system. M had argued that (1) T's failure to construct new sewers with greater capacity gave rise to an actionable nuisance, and (2) the flooding constituted an unjustified interference with M's right to respect for his private and family life under the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.8 and his right to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions under Sch.1 Part II Art.1 of the Act.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) a cause of action in nuisance would be contrary to the statutory scheme laid down in the Water Industry Act 1991 under which T operated the sewers. Individual householders could bring proceedings in respect of inadequate drainage only when the undertaker had failed to comply with an enforcement order made under the 1991 Act, and a parallel common law right whereby individual householders might bring court proceedings where no enforcement order had been made would set at nought the statutory scheme, Goldman v Hargrave [1967] 1 A.C. 645, Leakey v National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty [1980] Q.B. 485 and Sedleigh-Denfield v O'Callagan (Trustees for St Joseph's Society for Foreign Missions) [1940] A.C. 880 distinguished, and (2) the claim under the 1998 Act was ill founded. The statutory scheme under the 1991 Act balanced the interests of T's customers whose properties were subject to flooding with the remainder of its customers whose properties were drained by the sewers, by imposing a general drainage obligation on T and entrusting enforcement to an independent regulator, Hatton v United Kingdom (36022/97) (2003) 37 E.H.R.R. 28 considered. M could have pursued his complaint with the independent regulator but had chosen not to do so. Parliament had acted well within its bounds as a policy maker and the statutory scheme was compliant with the 1998 Act.
JUDGE Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Steyn; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hope of Craighead; Lord Scott of Foscote
COUNSEL For M: Stephen Hockman Q.C. and Peter Harrison. For TWU: Jonathan Sumption Q.C., David Pannick Q.C. and Michael Daiches.





NAME (wl) Lippiatt v South Gloucestershire Council
CITATION Lippiatt v South Gloucestershire Council [2000] QB 51
CIT [2000] QB 51
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance; Occupiers' Liability; Real Property; Travellers
SUMMARY Occupiers liability; travellers using land owned by local authority as base to commit acts of nuisance on neighbouring land; local authority liable in nuisance for repeated harmful acts committed by persons it knew were occupying land
SUMMARY L appealed against a decision striking out L's statement of claim against SGC on the ground that it disclosed no cause of action, following the decision in Hussain v Lancaster City Council [2000] Q.B. 1 . L claimed damages for acts of nuisance committed on neighbouring land by travellers occupying SGC's land, with the exception of a single act of barring access to L's land, which had taken place on SGC's land. L alleged that SGC had allowed the travellers to congregate on its land over a three year period and that they had used the land as a base for the unlawful activities that L complained of. SGC accepted that it could be liable in nuisance for the single act occurring on its land, as it formed a direct interference with L's use and enjoyment of his own land, but contended that no liability arose from acts of independent third parties that took place away from SGC's land.
HELD allowing the appeal, that there was no rule in law preventing an owner or occupier being liable in nuisance for the actions of his licensees occurring away from his land, Attorney General v Corke [1933] Ch. 89 and Smith v Scott [1973] Ch. 314 considered and Hussain distinguished on its facts. The attention of the judge below had not been drawn to authorities which showed that an occupier could be liable in circumstances where a claimant's enjoyment of his land was interfered with due to the continuing presence on the defendant's land of persons whose actual or apprehended activities the defendant knew included repeated harmful acts on the claimant's land.
JUDGE Evans LJ; Mummery LJ; Sir Christopher Staughton
COUNSEL For L: Barry Payton and Philip Norman. For SGC: W David Spens.





NAME (wl) Holbeck Hall Hotel Ltd v Scarborough Borough Council
CITATION Holbeck Hall Hotel Ltd v Scarborough Borough Council [2000] QB 836
CIT [2000] QB 836
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Duty of Care; Erosion; Foreseeability; Landslides; Private Nuisance; Right of Support
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY SBC appealed against a finding that they were liable in negligence for a land slip which had caused ground owned by HHH, their neighbour, to collapse. SBC argued that (1) there was no duty to take positive steps to provide support for a neighbour's land, and (2) if a duty of care did arise, it only applied where the defect causing the hazard was patent and could be observed by a reasonable landowner. It was held that (1) as SBC knew of the hazard, they did owe a duty to take positive steps to provide support for HHH's land; (2) SBC's duty was limited to taking care to avoid damage which they ought, without geological investigation, to have foreseen, and (3) SBC could not have foreseen a hazard of the magnitude that affected HHH's land.
SUMMARY SBC, owners of lower land, appealed against a decision (57 Con. L.R. 113) that it was liable to H, the owners of a hotel, for damage caused by a landslip. SBC's engineers had taken some limited remedial action and had been aware of the danger of further landslide but had not anticipated a slip of such proportions. SBC contended that it was under no duty to support the neighbouring land.
HELD allowing the appeal, that a measured duty of care was owed by a servient landowner who had actual or presumed knowledge of a danger of loss of support. That duty was not limited to escapes from the servient to the dominant land and included non feasance, Leakey v National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty [1980] Q.B. 485 applied. That duty, however, depended on foreseeability and SBC had not foreseen the magnitude of the risk and would not have done so without expert evidence derived from a geological survey. The duty might extend only to warning the owner of the dominant land of the foreseen risk and did not necessarily require expensive preventative works. Furthermore, it would be unfair and unreasonable to find liability in such circumstances where the danger had been equally apparent to the dominant owner.
JUDGE Stuart-Smith LJ; Schiemann LJ; Tuckey LJ
COUNSEL For H: Christopher Symons Q.C. and Paul Reed. For SBC: Timothy Stow Q.C. and Paul Darling Q.C.





NAME (wl) Khoransandjian v Bush
CITATION Khoransandjian v Bush [1993] QB 727
CIT [1993] QB 727
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure Other Related Subjects: Telecommunications; Causes of Action; Harassment; Nuisance; Telephones
FLAGS Overruled
SUMMARY Injunction; harassing telephone calls; whether harassment falling short of threats actionable; whether proprietary interest necessary to sustain action
SUMMARY Oral harassment not amounting to threats may be actionable if it may, or does, cause physical or psychiatric illness to the recipient. P, whose relationship with D had broken down, claimed relief against D, his threats and unwanted telephone calls, claiming his conduct was putting her under great distress. The judge made an interlocutory order restraining D from "using violence, or harassing, pestering or communicating with" P. D appealed.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that (1) harassment by unwanted telephone calls was actionable as a private nuisance notwithstanding that the recipient had no proprietary right or interest in the property; (2) oral harassment not amounting to a threat was actionable if it caused physical or psychiatric illness, or where there was a risk that the cumulative effect might cause such illness (Janvier v Sweeney [1919] 2 K.B. 316 applied; Burnett v George [1992] 1 F.L.R. 525 considered).
JUDGE Dillon LJ; Rose LJ; Peter Gibson J
COUNSEL For B: Caroline Harry Thomas. For K: Philip Turl.





NAME (wl) Dobson v Thames Water Utilities
CITATION Dobson v Thames Water Utilities [2009] EWCA Civ 28
CIT [2009] EWCA Civ 28
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Human Rights; Utilities; Environment; Damages; Just Satisfaction; Measure of Damages; Odours; Private Nuisance; Remedies; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life; Sewerage Undertakers; Waste Water Treatment
ABSTRACT The appellants (D) appealed against a determination ( [2007] EWHC 2021 (TCC), [2008] 2 All E.R. 362 ) concerning the award of damages for nuisance in a group action against the respondent sewerage undertaker (T).
ABSTRACT D were divided into two categories: those who occupied properties as owners or lessees and those who occupied without any legal interest in the properties. They all resided in the vicinity of sewage treatment works and had complained that they were affected by odours and mosquitoes. D served a group statement of case, claiming that T was liable for damages for private nuisance and negligence, and under the Human Rights Act 1998 for breaches of their human rights. T raised various threshold defences to the claims. A number of preliminary issues were determined and the instant appeal related to three of the judge's answers. Firstly, damages for nuisance might confer a sufficient remedy on those with a legal right to occupy such as to disentitle those living in the same household without such a legal right to a separate remedy under the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8 or the 1998 Act but whether they did would depend on the facts. Secondly, the alternative remedies under the Environmental Protection Act 1990 s.80 and s.82 , a complaint to OFWAT under the Water Industry Act 1991 s.94 and a nuisance abatement notice were all relevant to the issue of whether damages for owners/occupiers and/or those without a legal interest in their homes were necessary to afford just satisfaction under s.8(3) of the 1998 Act. Thirdly, as regards whether damages could be "topped up" under the 1998 Act in addition to common law damages, damages would only be awarded under s.8(3) if, taking account of the measure of damages for nuisance and the availability of alternative remedies, such damages were necessary to afford just satisfaction. The instant appeal particularly concerned the proper basis for an award of common law damages and damages for infringement of art.8 of the Convention and the proper remedy in respect of non-property-owning members of the same household.
ABSTRACT T submitted that, despite the award of damages being made only to the person with an interest in the land, the reality was to award damages that included the loss of amenity suffered by other persons residing at the property.
SUMMARY An award of damages in nuisance to a person with a proprietary interest in a property would be relevant to the question whether an award of damages was necessary to afford just satisfaction under the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8 to a person who lived in the same household but had no proprietary interest in the property. The award of damages at common law to a property owner would normally constitute just satisfaction to the owner for the purposes of the Human Rights Act 1998 s.8(3) and no additional award of compensation under that Act would normally be necessary.
HELD Appeal allowed in part.
HELD (1) Damages in nuisance were for injury to the property and not to the sensibilities of the occupier, Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd [1997] A.C. 655 applied. That was so as much for the case of the transitory nuisance interfering with comfort and enjoyment of the land as it was for the case of the nuisance that occasioned permanent injury to the land and to its capital value, or other pecuniary loss. It was also clear that a claimant had to show that he had in truth suffered a loss of amenity before substantial damages could be awarded. The actual impact of the nuisance upon the occupiers of the land would in practice be relevant to the assessment of common law damages for loss of amenity in many cases, including such as the instant case where a family home was in question and no physical injury to the property, loss of capital value, loss of rent or other pecuniary damage, arose. Also none of the majority speeches in Canary Wharf supported the view that the person who had the right to sue in nuisance was recovering damages on behalf of other occupiers of the property. (2) Where a public authority had been found to have acted unlawfully, the court could grant such relief or remedy as it considered just and appropriate. No award of damages was to be made unless, taking account of all the circumstances including any other relief or remedy granted in relation to the same act, the court was satisfied that the award was necessary to afford just satisfaction under art.41 of the Convention. (3) The first of the judge's three answers were reversed. An award of damages in nuisance to a person or persons with a proprietary interest in a property would be relevant to the question whether an award of damages was necessary to afford just satisfaction under art.8 to a person who lived in the same household but had no proprietary interest in the property. (4) As the judge had held, the availability of other remedies was relevant to the issue of whether damages were necessary to afford just satisfaction under s.8(3) of the 1998 Act. Under that provision, all circumstances had to be taken into account. (5) Despite the fact that damages for private nuisance were awarded as damage to "land", it was highly improbable, if not inconceivable, that Strasbourg would think it appropriate or just or necessary to award a further sum on top for breach of art.8. Accordingly the award of damages at common law to a property owner would normally constitute just satisfaction to the owner for the purposes of s.8(3) of the 1998 Act and no additional award of compensation under that Act would normally be necessary.
JUDGE Waller LJ; Richards LJ; Hughes LJ
COUNSEL For the appellants: Richard Gordon QC, Robert Weir. For the respondent: David Hart QC, Michael Daiches.





NAME (wl) McKenna v British Aluminium Ltd
CITATION McKenna v British Aluminium Ltd [2003] EWCA Civ 400
CIT [2003] EWCA Civ 400
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Planning; Brownfield Sites; Contaminated Land; Development; Environmental Impact Assessments; Remedial Works
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Proposed development of brownfield site containing gasholders - Developer put forward remediation strategy for contaminated land - Secretary of State not required to ignore remediation measures in deciding whether environmental effects were such as to require environmental impact assessment - Secretary of State could not assume in complex case that remediation measures imposed by condition would be successfully implemented - Secretary of State applied wrong test vitiating grant of permission - Town and Country Planning (Assessment of Environmental Effects) Regulations 1988 - Council Directive 85/337.
SUMMARY B appealed against the overturning ([2003] EWHC 8, [2003] N.P.C. 6) of a decision allowing its appeal against the failure of the local authority to determine its application for development within the appropriate period. B had applied for planning permission to redevelop an extensively contaminated brownfield site containing a number of gasholders. In its application B had submitted an outline remediation strategy in relation to the site, obtained from specialist environmental consultants. The judge held that the Secretary of State had erred in taking the remediation measures into account in deciding whether the development was likely to give rise to significant environmental effects such as to activate the requirement for an environmental impact assessment pursuant to the Town and Country Planning (Assessment of Environmental Effects) Regulations 1988. The correct approach it was submitted, was to have found that significant effects were likely and that an EIA was therefore required, leaving the suitability and effectiveness of the proposed remediation measures to be discussed and assessed in the context of the EIA procedures. B contended that this approach was erroneous and that the Secretary of State was required to consider the entirety of the development project which necessarily included the remediation works.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that the Secretary of State had erred in concluding that the imposition of a condition concerning the required remediation works would be successfully implemented, particularly in view of the uncertainties involved in the development proposal, World Wildlife Fund (WWF) v Autonome Provinz Bozen (C-435/97) [1999] E.C.R. I-5613 applied. When making the decision concerning the need for an EIA, the Secretary of State was not required to ignore the proposed remediation measures but had to make a practical judgment as to whether the project would be likely to have significant effects on the environment by virtue of factors such as its nature, size or location. The complexity of the project and of the proposed remedial measures might be important factors for consideration, R. v Rochdale MBC Ex p. Milne (No.2) [2001] Env. L.R. 22 applied.
JUDGE Pill LJ; Laws LJ; Arden LJ
COUNSEL For B: Keith Lindblom Q.C., Peter Village Q.C. and James Pereira. For G: David Wolfe.





NAME (wl) Hussain v Lancaster CC
CITATION Hussain v Lancaster CC [2000] QB 1
CIT [2000] QB 1
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance; Local Authorities' Powers and Duties; Negligence; Nuisance; Racial Harassment; Secure Tenancies
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY racial harassment of shopkeeper; council not liable in negligence or nuisance for harassment of shop owner by secured tenants
SUMMARY H, owner of a shop and residential property on a housing estate owned by LCC, brought an action against LCC in nuisance and negligence, alleging that it was liable for failing to institute possession proceedings or otherwise take action against secured tenants or people living with them who had committed serious acts of racial harassment against H. H sought to rely on a clause in LCC's standard form of tenancy agreement which placed an obligation on tenants to ensure, inter alia, that they or people living with them did not discriminate against or harass others, on LCC's equal opportunities policy which stated that LCC would take action against anyone committing racial harassment, and on the power to order possession under the Housing Act 1985 . LCC appealed against the dismissal of its application to strike out H's claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action.
HELD allowing the appeal, that (1) in a claim for nuisance, the person to be sued was the occupier of the property from which the nuisance emanated. A landlord was not generally liable for nuisance committed by his tenant unless he had authorised the tenant to commit the nuisance and, since LCC had not done so, it could not be held liable, and (2) in order for a plaintiff to succeed in a claim in negligence relating to the exercise of statutory powers, it was necessary to establish either that the defendant had been irrational in not exercising the relevant power or that there were exceptional reasons for holding that the policy of the legislation at issue required that compensation be paid to those suffering loss due to the failure to exercise the power. In the instant case, H did not come within either of those categories and, furthermore, it was not fair, just and reasonable to impose liability on LCC.
JUDGE Hirst LJ; Hutchison LJ; Thorpe LJ
COUNSEL For the plaintiffs: Daniel Brennan Q.C. and David Watkinson. For LCC: Rupert Jackson Q.C. and Natasha Joffe.





NAME (wl) Coventry v Lawrence (no 2)
CITATION Coventry v Lawrence (no 2) [2014] UKSC 46
CIT [2014] UKSC 46
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Civil Procedure; Human Rights; After the Event Insurance; Costs; Costs Orders; Injunctions; Landlords; Motor Sports; Noise; Private Nuisance; Right to Fair Trial; Success Fees
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The court was required to deal with issues arising from its previous judgment on an appeal by the appellants (L) against the dismissal [2012] EWCA Civ 26) of their noise nuisance claim against the respondents (C and M).
ABSTRACT L owned a house close to a motor-sports stadium and track occupied by C and M. They had originally brought the case against C, M and the landlords of the stadium and track (W). Before the trial, a fire rendered the house uninhabitable. At trial, the judge found that only C and M were liable in nuisance. He awarded damages and granted a noise-limiting injunction to take effect on January 1, 2012 or when the bungalow was habitable, whichever was the earlier. He gave permission to apply to vary the terms of the injunction from October 1, 2011 onwards. Finally, he directed that C and M should pay 60 per cent of L's costs. The Court of Appeal held that there had been no nuisance. The instant court disagreed, finding C and M liable and restoring the judge's orders (Coventry (t/a RDC Promotions) v Lawrence [2014] UKSC 13, [2014] A.C. 822). The remaining issues were (i) whether the injunction should be suspended until the house was habitable; (ii) whether the parties should be permitted to apply to vary immediately; (iii) whether W were liable for C and M's nuisance; (iv) whether the costs order infringed the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.6 or Protocol 1 art.1.
SUMMARY Whether a landlord had directly participated in a noise nuisance from a motor-sports stadium was largely a question of fact for the trial judge. The fact that a landlord had done nothing to stop or discourage the nuisance could not amount to participation.
HELD Judgment accordingly.
HELD (Carnwath and Mance JJ.S.C. dissenting on the issue of W's liability) (1) The injunction ought to be suspended until the house was habitable. It was intended to prevent interference with ordinary residential use and enjoyment, and while such use and enjoyment was impossible, there was no justification for maintaining it (see paras 5-7, 49 of judgment). (2) The parties should have liberty to apply at any time to vary or discharge the injunction. The argument that it should be discharged on the ground that damages would be an adequate remedy now had some prospect of success. That provided a good reason, not in existence at the time of the original order, for allowing the parties to apply without delay (paras 8-9, 49). (3) A landlord was liable for his tenant's nuisance where he had authorised it, either by actively and directly participating in it, or by letting the property in circumstances where there was a very high degree of probability that the letting would result in the nuisance, Southwark LBC v Mills [2001] 1 A.C. 1 followed. In the instant case, the nuisance had not been an inevitable, or almost certain, consequence of the letting. It was not enough that W had known how C and M would use the premises and that the use had resulted in nuisance. The use could have been carried on without nuisance to L. Nor had W actively or directly participated in the nuisance. There was little authority on the issue, but whether a landlord had directly participated in a nuisance was largely a question of fact for the trial judge. The question turned principally on events subsequent to the grant of the lease, though it might take colour from the nature and circumstances of the grant and what preceded it. None of the factors relied on by L were sufficient to establish that W had participated in the nuisance. The fact that a landlord had done nothing to stop or discourage the nuisance could not amount to participation, Malzy v Eicholz [1916] 2 K.B. 308 applied. Moreover, absent very unusual circumstances, a landlord's failure to take steps to mitigate a nuisance could not create an inference that he had authorised it. Nor could it be said that a landlord, by attempting to fight off allegations of nuisance against his tenant, was participating in or authorising the nuisance. Although the judge's dismissal of L's claim against W would be upheld, there would be no order for costs against L. W had succeeded on a basis that was different from the judge's and which had neither been pleaded nor argued at first instance (paras 11-12, 15-26, 31, 49). (4) L's costs at first instance consisted of base costs, a success fee and an after the event insurance premium. The costs order required C and M to pay 60 per cent of all three elements. It was open to the instant court to consider whether the costs regime in the Access to Justice Act 1999, and in particular a claimant's right to recover any success fee and ATE premium from an unsuccessful defendant, infringed the Convention, James v United Kingdom (A/98) (1986) 8 E.H.R.R. 123, MGN Ltd v United Kingdom (39401/04) [2011] 1 Costs L.O. 84 and Dombo Beheer BV v Netherlands (A/274-A) (1994) 18 E.H.R.R. 213 considered. While C and M's liability for the costs might be inconsistent with their rights under art.6 or Protocol 1 art.1, it would be wrong for the court to decide the point without giving the government the opportunity to make representations. If the costs order infringed, the proper outcome might be to grant a declaration of incompatibility. However, that would be questionable given that the relevant provisions of the 1999 Act and the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 had been repealed and replaced. If C and M wished to pursue the matter, the instant appeal would have to be re-listed for hearing once appropriate notice had been given to the Attorney General and the Secretary of State for Justice (paras 32-34, 40-44, 49).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Sumption JSC; Lord Carnwath JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: Stephen Hockman QC, William Upton. For the first respondent: Robert McCracken QC, Sebastian Kokelaar. For the second respondent: Edward Denehan, Giselle McGowan.





NAME (wl) Barr & Ors v Biffa Waste Services Limited
CITATION Barr & Ors v Biffa Waste Services Limited [2012] EWCA Civ 312
CIT [2012] EWCA Civ 312
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Environment; Household Waste; Public Nuisance; Reasonable User; Smell; Unlicensed Disposal of Waste
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellants (X) appealed against a decision ([2011] EWHC 1003 (TCC), [2011] 4 All E.R. 1065) dismissing their claims against the respondents (B) for nuisance. B cross-appealed against the decision that its activities were not protected by statutory immunity.
ABSTRACT X lived on an estate near a waste-tipping site operated by B. In 2003, a waste management permit had been granted for the tipping of pre-treated waste. X later asserted that over a five-year period they had been affected by odour coming from the site, amounting to nuisance. The judge found that (i) the controlling principle was that of "reasonable user"; (ii) because the common law had to be adapted to march in step with European and domestic environmental legislation and the 2003 permit, B's use was deemed to have been reasonable if it complied with the terms of the permit; (iii) the grant of a permit was strategic in nature and so altered the neighbourhood's character against which reasonableness was to be judged and the permit, by implication, provided a statutory licence for the escape of a certain amount of odour emission such that B's use was deemed reasonable and the claims failed; (iv) by imposing a threshold requirement of one odour complaint each day, most of the claims would have failed. The court considered the test of a "reasonable user" including the planning permission and waste permit; whether B had a defence of statutory authority; and the use of a threshold.
SUMMARY A judge had erred in dismissing a claim of nuisance relating to smells emitted by a waste-tipping site by extending the existing principles of "reasonable user" and considering that complying with the terms of a permit meant that such use of the site had been reasonable. There was no basis for using a statutory scheme to cut down private law rights and, in any event, the permit did not authorise the emission of such smells.
HELD Appeal allowed, cross-appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) TThe judge saw the concept of "reasonable user" as an important part of the argument for taking account of the statutory scheme and the permit. An activity which was conducted in contravention of planning or environmental control was unlikely to be reasonable, but the converse did not follow, Watson v Croft Promo-Sport Ltd [2009] EWCA Civ 15, [2009] 3 All E.R. 249 considered. "Reasonable user" was at most a different way of describing old principles, not an excuse for reinventing them, Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather Plc [1994] 2 A.C. 264 and Bamford v Turnley 122 E.R. 27 considered. The permit was neither strategic in nature nor did it change the essential character of the neighbourhood, which had long included tipping. The only change was the introduction of a more offensive form of waste, producing a new type of smell emission. The permit did not, and did not purport to, authorise the emission of such smells. Even if compliance with a statutory permit was capable of being a relevant factor, it was for a defendant to prove compliance (see paras 46, 64-67, 71, 76-77 of judgment). (2) The common law of nuisance had co-existed with statutory controls since the nineteenth century. There was no principle that it should march with a statutory scheme covering similar subject matter. Short of express or implied statutory authority to commit a nuisance, there was no basis, in principle or authority, for using such a statutory scheme to cut down private law rights, Cambridge Water considered. Further, if there was a problem in meeting a need within the existing legal framework, its solution had to rest with the legislature and Parliament had not yet chosen to provide statutory immunity from common law nuisance claims for waste sites provided in accordance with Directive 2006/12, Metropolitan Asylum District Managers v Hill (No.2) (1881) 6 App. Cas. 193 applied (paras 46, 94-102, 106). (3) There was no general rule requiring or justifying the setting of a threshold in nuisance cases, Kennaway v Thompson [1981] Q.B. 88 and Watson considered. By adopting such a threshold, the judge had deprived at least some of X of their right to have their individual cases assessed on their merits (paras 46, 121).
JUDGE Arden LJ; Carnwath LJ; Patten LJ
COUNSEL For the appellants: Stephen Tromans QC, John Bates, Catherine Dobson. For the respondent: Ian Croxford QC, Thomas de la Mare.





NAME (wl) Kennaway v Thompson
CITATION Kennaway v Thompson [1981] QB 88
CIT [1981] QB 88
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance; Damages; Injunctions; Noise; Nuisance
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Noise; motor boat racing club; injunction
SUMMARY Where a continuing actionable nuisance is proved, only in exceptional circumstances should damages be awarded in lieu of an injunction. Since the early 1960s motor boat racing and water-skiing had been carried on by a club of which the defendants were representatives. In 1972 the plaintiff moved into a house which she had had built near to the lake. Thereafter the nature of the club's activities increased in frequency and noise, in that large power boats took part in international meetings preceded by periods of noisy practice. The plaintiff sought damages for nuisance and an injunction. Mais, J. awarded her GBP 1,000 for past nuisance and GBP 15,000 in respect of future nuisance, ruling that the public interest was such that it would be oppressive to enjoin the club from continuing its activities.
HELD allowing the plaintiff's appeal, that the public interest should not prevail over the private interest of the person affected by the continuing nuisance and that accordingly the plaintiff was entitled to an injunction (under which the club was ordered to curtail its activities, restricting noisy meetings to a limited number of occasions). (Shelfer v City of London Electric Lighting Co (No.1) [1895] 1 Ch. 287 followed; Miller v Jackson [1977] Q.B. 966 considered).
JUDGE Lawton LJ; Waller LJ; Sir David Cairns





NAME (wl) Bone v Searle
CITATION Bone v Searle [1975] 1 WLR 797
CIT [1975] 1 WLR 797
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Damages; Air Pollution; Injunctions; Measure of Damages; Odours; Pigs
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Smell; no injury to health or pecuniary loss
SUMMARY In assessing damages for loss of amenity caused by a nuisance a parallel may be drawn with the loss of amenity caused by personal injury to achieve a reasonable award without adopting any rigid standard of comparison. Over a period of twelve-and-a-half years smells emanating from a neighbouring pig farm owned by S had caused a nuisance to properties owned by B and W who claimed an injunction restraining the nuisance and damages. The judge found that no diminution in the value of the properties had resulted but granted an injunction and awarded over GBP 6,000 damages to B and W. S appealed contending, inter alia, that the award was too high.
HELD allowing the appeal against the award, that by drawing a parallel with loss of sense of smell as a result of personal injury it is confirmed that the award was erroneous and GBP 1,000 damages for each plaintiff would be substituted (dictum of Greer L.J. in Flint v Lovell [1935] 1 K.B. 354 applied).
JUDGE Stephenson LJ; Scarman LJ; Ormrod LJ





NAME (wl) Attorney General v PYA Quarries Ltd (no 1)
CITATION Attorney General v PYA Quarries Ltd (no 1) [1957] 2 QB 169
CIT [1957] 2 QB 169
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Nuisance Other Related Subjects: Civil Procedure; Injunctions; Public Nuisance; Quarries
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Public nuisance; vibration and dust from quarry
SUMMARY The following principles apply to a public nuisance: - 1. Any nuisance is "public" which materially affects the reasonable comfort and convenience of life of a class of Her Majesty's subjects. 2. The sphere of the nuisance may be described generally as "the neighbourhood"; but the question whether the local community within that sphere comprises a sufficient number of persons to constitute a class of the public is a question of fact in every case. 3. It is not necessary to prove that every member of the class has been injuriously affected; it is sufficient to show that a representative crossection of the class has been so affected for an injunction to issue. 4. In general, a public nuisance is proved by the cumulative effect which it is shown to have had on the people living within its sphere of influence. In other words, a normal and legitimate way of proving a public nuisance is to prove a sufficiently large collection of private nuisances. 5. Prima facie, if a nuisance, whether public or private, is shown to have existed at the time the writ was issued the plaintiff is entitled to an injunction. If, however, between the writ and the trial the nuisance has been abated the court will usually stay its hand and merely give the plaintiff leave to apply in the action for an injunction if the trouble should recur.Per Denning L.J.: " . . . a public nuisance is a nuisance which is so widespread in its range or so indiscriminate in its effect that it would not be reasonable to expect one person to take proceedings on his own responsibility to put a stop to it, but that it should be taken on the responsibility of the community at large."The Attorney General in a relator action claimed an injunction perpetually restraining the defendant company from carrying on the business of quarrying in such a manner as to occasion a nuisance by dust or vibrations. The quarry adjoined a highway, and there were several houses abutting on the highway. Since 1949 there had been constant complaints by persons living near the quarry about the vibration and dust. There was a body of evidence as to personal discomfort. Oliver J. found that the various nuisances complained of still existed and granted the injunctions asked for.
HELD on appeal, any nuisance was "public" which materially affected the reasonable comfort and convenience of life of a class of Her Majesty's subjects and, on the evidence, a nuisance from vibration and dust was sufficiently widespread to amount to a common or public nuisance; therefore, the injunctions had been rightly granted and the appeal failed. ( Soltau v De Held 61 E.R. 291 applied R. v White and Ward 97 E.R. 338 applied; Attorney General v Sheffield Gas Consumers Co 43 E.R. 119 applied; R. v Price (1884) 12 Q.B.D. 247 applied; Attorney General v Stone (1895) 12 T.L.R. 76 applied; Attorney General v Keymer Brick and Tile Co (1903) 67 J.P. 434 applied; Attorney General v Cole & Son [1901] 1 Ch. 205 applied and Attorney General v Corke [1933] Ch. 89 applied).
JUDGE Parker LJ





NAME (wl) R v Rimmington; R v Goldstien
CITATION R v Rimmington; R v Goldstien [2005] UKHL 63
CIT [2005] UKHL 63
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Criminal Law Other Related Subjects: Human Rights; Certainty; Common Law; Mens Rea; No Punishment Without Law; Public Nuisance
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY The offence of public nuisance was clear, precise, adequately defined and based on a discernible rational principle, and was not therefore contrary to common law principles or incompatible with the Human Rights Act 1989 Sch.1 Part I Art.7.
SUMMARY The appellants (R and G) appealed against a decision ([2003] EWCA Crim 3450, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 2878) refusing their appeals against convictions of causing a public nuisance at common law. R had sent a large number of separate postal packages containing racist material to individual members of the public based on their perceived ethnicity. He had been charged on indictment of a single count of public nuisance, contrary to common law. G had posted an envelope containing salt to the address of a friend as a practical joke. The envelope did not reach G's friend, as at a post sorting office some of the salt leaked onto a postal worker's hands. The postal worker raised the alarm believing that the salt was anthrax. The sorting office was evacuated, the second delivery was cancelled and the police were called. R and G submitted that (1) the conduct formerly chargeable as the crime of public nuisance had now become the subject of express statutory provision, that the offence should be charged under the appropriate statutory provision, and that the crime of public nuisance had therefore ceased to have any practical application or legal existence; (2) the crime of causing a public nuisance, as currently interpreted and applied, lacked the certainty and predictability necessary to meet the requirements of the common law itself or the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.7 .
HELD allowing the appeals, that (1) the most typical and obvious causes of public nuisance were the subject of express statutory prohibition. Where Parliament had defined the ingredients of an offence, possible defences, a prescribed mode of trial and a maximum penalty it was ordinarily proper that conduct falling within that definition be prosecuted under the statutory offence and not a common law offence for which the potential penalty was unlimited. Good practice and respect for the primacy of a statute required that conduct falling within the terms of a specific statutory provision should be prosecuted under that provision unless there was good reason for doing otherwise. Although cases of common law public nuisance were relatively rare, it was not open to the court to conclude that the common law crime of causing a public nuisance no longer existed. (2) The guiding principles of common law, that no one should be punished under a law unless it was sufficiently clear and certain to enable him to know what conduct was forbidden before he did it, and that no one should be punished for any act that was not clearly and ascertainably punishable when the act was done, were entirely consistent with Art. 7, R. v Misra (Amit) [2004] EWCA Crim 2375, [2005] 1 Cr. App. R. 21 applied. The offence of public nuisance as defined in, R. v Stephens (1865-66) L.R. 1 Q.B. 702 was clear, precise, adequately defined and based on a discernible rational principle, Stephens , Attorney General v PYA Quarries Ltd (No.1) [1957] 2 Q.B. 169 , R. v Madden (Michael John) [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1379 and Sedleigh-Denfield v O'Callagan (Trustees for St Joseph's Society for Foreign Missions) [1940] A.C. 880 considered. In the instant case, R had not caused a common injury to a section of the public, so his conduct lacked the essential ingredient of common nuisance. To permit a conviction of causing a public nuisance to rest on an injury caused to separate individuals, rather than on an injury suffered to the community or a significant section of it as a whole, was to contradict the rationale of the offence, pervert its nature, and change the constituent elements of the offence to the detriment of the accused, R. v Norbury [1978] Crim. L.R. 435 and R. v Johnson (Anthony Thomas) [1997] 1 W.L.R. 367 doubted. R's conviction was quashed. A defendant was responsible for a nuisance which he knew, or ought to have known, would be the consequence of what he did or omitted to do, R. v Shorrock (Peter Coar) [1994] Q.B. 279 considered. In G's case it had not been proven that G knew or should reasonably have known that the salt would escape into the sorting office or in the course of the post. G's conviction was therefore quashed.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Rodger of Earlsferry; Baroness Hale of Richmond; Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood
COUNSEL For the appellant Rimmington: James Guthrie QC, Bernard Eaton. For the Crown in Rimmington: David Perry, Mark Rainsford. For the appellant Goldstein: Jonathan Goldberg QC, Gary Grant. For the Crown in Goldstein: David Perry, Tracy Ayling.





NAME (wl) Transco Plc v Stockport MBC
CITATION Transco Plc v Stockport MBC [2003] UKHL 61
CIT [2003] UKHL 61
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Escape; Local Authorities' Powers and Duties; Natural User; Negligence; Nuisance; Right of Support; Rylands V Fletcher Liability; Strict Liability; Subsidence; Water Supply
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY The court reviewed the rule of law laid down in Rylands v Fletcher, finding that the piping of a water supply from the mains to storage tanks within a property was a routine function that would not ordinarily raise a hazard and was therefore an ordinary use of the land.
SUMMARY T appealed against a ruling ([2001] EWCA Civ 212, [2001] Env. L.R. 44) that the local authority was not liable for damage to T's property under the rule in Rylands v Fletcher (1868) L.R. 3 H.L. 330 . Water had escaped from a pipe belonging to the local authority and supplying a block of flats of which it was the owner. There was no negligence on the part of the local authority. The water caused the collapse of a nearby railway embankment which left a gas pipe belonging to T unsupported and at risk of damage. T claimed against the local authority the cost of remedial measures to protect the gas pipe, arguing that the local authority was liable for damage caused by the escape of the water without proof of negligence. The issues to be decided were whether the local authority had brought onto its land something likely to cause danger or mischief if it escaped, and that was an ordinary user of its land.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that the test was whether the local authority had done something on its land which it (1) recognised, or ought reasonably to have recognised judged by the standards appropriate to the place and time, as giving rise to an exceptionally high risk of danger or mischief if there should be an escape, and (2) recognised, or ought to have recognised, as being quite out of the ordinary for the place and time. Piping of a water supply was a routine function which would not have struck anyone as raising any special hazard. The local authority had not accumulated any water but had merely arranged a supply adequate to meet the needs of the residents of the flats; the situation did not stand comparison with the substantial reservoir in Rylands v Fletcher . It was entirely normal and routine and could not be seen as in any way extraordinary or unusual, Rylands v Fletcher considered. The conditions to be met before strict liability could be imposed on the local authority were far from being met on the facts of this case.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Hoffmann; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough; Lord Scott of Foscote; Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe
COUNSEL For T: Ian Leeming Q.C. and Robert Sterling. For the local authority: Mark Turner Q.C., Stephen Davies and John Sorabji.





NAME (wl) Gore v Stannard (trading as Wyvern Tyres)
CITATION Gore v Stannard (trading as Wyvern Tyres) [2012] EWCA Civ 1248
CIT [2012] EWCA Civ 1248
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Real Property; Dangerousness; Dangerous User; Escape; Fire; Natural User; Rylands V Fletcher Liability; Strict Liability; Tyres
ABSTRACT The appellant (W) appealed against a decision that he was liable, under the rule in Rylands v Fletcher , for damage caused to the land of the respondent (G).
ABSTRACT W ran a business supplying vehicle tyres and stored some 3,000 tyres on its premises, which were next to G's premises. A fire broke out, caused by W's wiring or electrical appliances. The fire quickly intensified, ignited the tyres, and spread to G's premises. The court found that S had a defence to a claim of negligence, under the Fires Prevention (Metropolis) Act 1774 s.86, because the fire was accidental. However, it found that the rule in Rylands v Fletcher applied because the haphazard way in which the tyres were stored was dangerous and a non-natural use of the land within the meaning of the rule. The issue was whether there was a special operation of the rule in Rylands v Fletcher when damage to a claimant's land was caused by the spread of fire.
SUMMARY The guidance set out in Transco Plc v Stockport MBC [2003] UKHL 61, [2004] 2 A.C. 1 for the application of the rule in Rylands v Fletcher applied to cases involving the escape of fire. However, cases of fire damage were likely to be very difficult to bring within the rule for several reasons, including the fact that it was the "thing" which had been brought onto the land which had to escape, not the fire.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The decision in Transco Plc v Stockport MBC [2003] UKHL 61, [2004] 2 A.C. 1 was the seminal authority for the test to be applied in Rylands v Fletcher . The proper approach was that the defendant had to be the owner or occupier of land; he had to bring, keep or collect an exceptionally dangerous or mischievous thing on his land; he had to have recognised, or ought reasonably to have recognised, that there was an exceptionally high risk of danger or mischief if that thing should escape; his use of the land had to be extraordinary and unusual; the thing had to escape from his property into or onto the property of another; the escape had to cause damage of a type relevant to the right and enjoyment of the claimant's land. That re-statement of the rule had not left aside fire damage as some special category. It was not easy to rationalise the troubling decision in Musgrove v Pandelis [1919] 2 K.B. 43, but the court was bound to hold that the guidance in Transco applied in cases involving the escape of fire, Transco followed. However, cases of fire damage were likely to be very difficult to bring within the rule. First, it was the "thing" which had been brought onto the land which had to escape, not the fire which was started or increased by the "thing". Second, whilst fire might be a dangerous thing, the occasions when it was brought onto land might be limited to cases where the fire had been deliberately or negligently started by the occupier. Third, starting a fire on one's own land might well be an ordinary use of the land. Musgrove had to be treated as a fact-sensitive decision and would most definitely be decided differently in present times, Musgrove doubted (see paras 21-22, 46-49 of judgment). In the instant case, the "thing" brought onto S's premises was a large stock of tyres, which were not exceptionally dangerous or mischievous. There was no evidence that W recognised or ought to have recognised that there was an exceptionally high risk of danger or mischief if they escaped. What had escaped was the fire, not the tyres. The recorder had been wrong to conclude that the escape of fire brought the case within Rylands v Fletcher principles. In any event, keeping tyres on the premises of a tyre-fitting business was not an extraordinary or unusual use of the land. Liability under Rylands v Fletcher had not been established (para.50). (2) (Per Lewison L.J.) The scope of strict liability in relation to fire should have been limited further. A fire which started accidentally had not been brought onto the land by the occupier "for his own purposes". Under s.86 of the 1774 Act, a person was expressly exempted from liability for accidental fires. Parliament must have intended to change the common law proposition that a man "must use his own as not to injure another". The decision in Mason v Levy Auto Parts of England Ltd [1967] 2 Q.B. 530, which followed Musgrove, was wrong and should have been overruled. An occupier of land should not be liable to his neighbour for a fire that began accidentally unless he was negligent in failing to prevent its spread, Transco, Musgrove, Mason and Goldman v Hargrave [1967] 1 A.C. 645 considered (paras 107, 109, 112, 126, 129, 164-166).
JUDGE Ward LJ; Etherton LJ; Lewison LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Jonathan Waite QC, Michele de Gregorio. For the respondent: Philip Rainey QC, Nicholas Isaac.





NAME (wl) LMS International v Styrene Packaging Ltd
CITATION LMS International v Styrene Packaging Ltd [2005] EWHC 2065 (TCC)
CIT [2005] EWHC 2065 (TCC)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Negligence; Damage; Fire; Negligence; Party Walls; Right of Support; Rylands V Fletcher Liability
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Rylands v Fletcher liability; fire; making and storing polystyrene blocks; non-natural user of land
SUMMARY The claimants claimed against the defendants under the rule in Rylands v Fletcher and in negligence and nuisance in respect of a fire which had spread from the factory premises occupied by the first defendant (S) to the adjoining premises occupied by the first claimant (L) and owned by the second and third claimants (C). S made expanded polystyrene at its premises. The fire had broken out whilst an employee of S was cutting expanded polystyrene blocks with a hot wire machine. The fire had spread quickly and S's premises had been largely destroyed. Fire and smoke had caused extensive damage to L's premises and their contents. L claimed for damage to machinery, plant and stock and business interruption and C claimed for building reinstatement costs and loss of rent. The claim was based on strict liability for the escape of fire in accordance with the rule in Rylands v Fletcher , alternatively on negligence and nuisance. There was a secondary negligence/nuisance claim based on S's alleged failure to take prompt action to put the fire out. The claims were also made against the individual defendants (D) as S's landlords.
HELD giving judgment for L and C, that (1) the cause of the fire was probably associated with an arc or spark caused by the breaking of a wire that ignited the block being cut. The stages in the causation of the fire were not unusual and not in any way inexplicable. (2) In respect of Rylands v Fletcher liability S had brought on to their premises things which were likely to cause and/or catch fire. The flammable material was kept in such a way that if ignited the fire was likely to spread to L's premises. The flammable material and the hot wire cutting machine represented a recognisable risk to L. S's use of the land was a non-natural user, Cambridge Water Co Ltd v Eastern Counties Leather Plc [1994] 2 A.C. 264 applied and Transco Plc v Stockport MBC [2003] UKHL 61, [2004] 2 A.C. 1 distinguished. (3) S was clearly liable in negligence and nuisance. They failed to take proper fire precautions. There were no interlocks on the cutting machine and the staff were not properly trained to deal with fires. The employee operating the hot wire cutter had not been trained and should not have been left unsupervised. S should have properly segregated the stored blocks of polystyrene or installed an automatic fire detection system. The decision not to install such a system was negligent and in breach of the Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997 . (4) There was also negligence in failing to deal with or abate the fire immediately. (5) S was also liable to L in nuisance for failing to carry out proper works to the party wall after the fire. (6) D were not liable as landlords for the default of S, but they were liable to C under the terms of various deeds for failing to provide proper support to the party wall by carrying out appropriate remedial works after the fire.
JUDGE Judge Peter Coulson QC
COUNSEL For the claimants: Stephen Bickford-Smith. For the defendants: Andrew McGee.





NAME (wl) Ellison v Ministry of Defence
CITATION Ellison v Ministry of Defence [2016] EWHC 590 (TCC)
CIT [2016] EWHC 590 (TCC)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Insurance Other Related Subjects: Contracts; Dishonesty; Electricity Interconnectors; Exclusion Clauses; Insurance Contracts; Non-Disclosure
ABSTRACT The court was required to determine the meaning of "deliberate ... non-disclosure" in an exclusion clause in an insurance policy.
ABSTRACT 
ABSTRACT The claimant company owned and operated an undersea interconnector which provided a link between the electricity systems of Northern Ireland and Scotland. The interconnector was insured by the defendant insurers. In Clause 5 of the policy the insurers acknowledged that they had received adequate information to evaluate the risk of insurance, and in cl.6(a) they agreed that the policy could only be avoided for reasons of non-disclosure where that non-disclosure had been deliberate or fraudulent. In 2011 the company made a claim under the policy. The insurers tried to rely on cl.6(a) by alleging that the company had deliberately failed to disclose that there had been problems with the interconnector's cables.
ABSTRACT The issue was whether the reference in the policy to "deliberate ... non-disclosure" meant that the contract could be avoided where the company had honestly but mistakenly decided not to disclose a particular document or fact; or whether it meant that avoidance was only available if there had been a deliberate decision not to disclose, such that the non-disclosure involved an element of dishonesty.
ABSTRACT The insurers argued that fraudulent non-disclosure involved an element of dishonesty, and the presumption against surplusage meant that "deliberate ... non-disclosure" had to be given a separate and distinct meaning.
SUMMARY The court determined that "deliberate ... non-disclosure", as referred to in an exclusion clause in an insurance policy, had to involve a dishonest decision not to disclose. A company's decision not to disclose something as the result of an honest but mistaken belief that it did not need to be disclosed was therefore not enough to allow the insurers to avoid the policy.
HELD Judgment for claimant.
HELD (1) In light of the Oxford English dictionary definition of "deliberate", the expression "deliberate or fraudulent non-disclosure" suggested a situation where the company intentionally failed to disclose something which it knew it should disclose. There was plenty of authority that the use of "deliberate" in the context of a "breach" or "default" meant an intentional act, and there was no logical distinction between a deliberate breach, on the one hand, and a deliberate non-disclosure on the other, De Beers UK Ltd (formerly Diamond Trading Co Ltd) v Atos Origin IT Services UK Ltd [2010] EWHC 3276 (TCC), [2011] B.L.R. 274 considered. In each case, the act or omission involved an element of culpability, of doing something which should not be done: it incorporated an element of dishonest wrongdoing. The word "deliberate" meant that the act of non-disclosure was intentional, that the insured acted in a way in which they knew they should not. Furthermore, the presumption against surplusage was not a "hard-edged" rule and the court should guard against giving it too much prominence in circumstances where some surplusage was often found in commercial contracts, Ener-G Holdings Plc v Hormell [2012] EWCA Civ 1059, [2013] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 1162 considered. In any event, the court was not persuaded that "deliberate" and "fraudulent" meant the same thing. Conduct could be deliberate and dishonest but not fraudulent. For example, a breach of contract could be deliberate and made in the knowledge that it was a breach, but might not be fraudulent. Similarly, a representation might be dishonest but, if there was no intention to deceive or no intention that the misrepresentation be acted upon, then it was not fraudulent. Guidance from the Financial Ombudsman Service also drew that distinction. A sensible and workable distinction between deliberate dishonesty and fraud was readily identifiable. On that basis, both words had utility, but both involved an element of dishonesty. Accordingly, "deliberate or fraudulent non-disclosure" in cl.6(a) meant a deliberate decision not to disclose something which the insured knew should be disclosed, and did not extend to an honest mistake (see paras 25-32, 35-36, 40-43, 45 of judgment).
HELD (2) The proviso in cl.6(a) was a carve-out: an acknowledgement that, despite the wide range of remedies which the insurers accepted were not available to them, there was one type of situation which they were not prepared to forego. There was nothing in cl.5 or cl.6(a) which supported the insurers' case for a wide interpretation of the carve out (paras 46-52).
HELD (3) A finding that the company would be penalised for dishonesty, but not for an honest mistake accorded with commercial common sense, HIH Casualty & General Insurance Ltd v Chase Manhattan Bank [2003] UKHL 6, [2003] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 349 considered (paras 54-55).
HELD 
JUDGE Coulson J
COUNSEL For the claimant: Marcus Taverner QC, Calum Lamont. For the defendants: Tom Adam QC, Nicholas Saunders.





NAME (wl) Gray v Jones
CITATION Gray v Jones [2015] UKSC 72
CIT [2015] UKSC 72
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Landlord and Tenant Other Related Subjects: Contracts; Apportionment; Break Clauses; Business Tenancies; Implied Terms; Rent; Repayments
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT A tenant (M) appealed against a decision ([2014] EWCA Civ 603, [2014] L. ) that a term concerning repayment of rent could not be implied into a lease.
ABSTRACT The term of the lease ran until 2 February 2018. Rent was payable quarterly in advance on the usual quarter days. M exercised a right to terminate the lease under a break clause, and the lease terminated on 24 January 2012. Notice given under the break clause would only be effective if there were no arrears of rent and a break premium of one year's rent was paid. M therefore paid the basic rent in full for the quarter starting on 25 December 2011 and ending on 24 March 2012, together with the break premium. Thereafter M demanded repayment of the rent for the period from 25 January to 24 March 2012. The landlord refused to make repayment and M commenced proceedings to recover the rent, a car parking fee, insurance charge and service charge for the post-termination period. The judge at first instance held that a term should be implied into the lease to the effect that M was entitled to those sums. The Court of Appeal disagreed.
SUMMARY It would be wrong to imply a term that a tenant would be entitled to a refund of rent paid quarterly in advance if it exercised a break clause. It was well-established that rent paid in advance could not be apportioned on a time basis. It would be wrong to attribute an intention to the contrary save in a very clear case.
HELD Appeal dismissed.
HELD (1) Implied terms generally - A clear statement of the tests of necessity for business efficacy and obviousness in relation to implying terms appeared in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings 180 C.L.R. 266, BP considered. The instant court made additional observations: (a) the implication of a term was not dependent on proof of an intention of the parties; the court was not concerned with the hypothetical answer of the actual parties, but with that of notional reasonable people in their position; (b) a term should not be implied into a detailed commercial contract merely because it appeared fair or because the parties would have agreed it if it had been suggested to them; (c) business necessity and obviousness could be alternatives, in the sense that only one of them needed to be satisfied; (d) if the officious bystander test was used, it was vital to formulate the question to be posed by him with the utmost care; (e) necessity for business efficacy required a value judgement. A simpler way of putting it was that a term could only be implied if, without the term, the contract would lack commercial or practical coherence, Philips Electronique Grand Public SA v British Sky Broadcasting Ltd [1995] E.M.L.R. 472 and Atkins International HA of Vaduz v Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (The APJ Priti) [1987] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 37 applied. The decision in Attorney General of Belize v Belize Telecom Ltd [2009] UKPC 10, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 1988 suggested that the process of implying terms into a contract was part of the exercise of construing the contract. However, construing the words used in a contract and implying additional words were different processes governed by different rules. It was only after the process of construing the express words was complete that the issue of an implied term fell to be considered. The observations of Lord Hoffman at paras 17-27 of the Belize judgment should be treated as inspired discussion rather than authoritative guidance. Belize did not relax the traditional and highly restrictive approach to the implication of terms, Belize explained (see paras 18-22, 26, 31, 60, 66, 77 of judgment).
HELD (2) Factors in favour of an implied term - Each quarter's rent paid in advance was referable to the tenant's use and enjoyment of the premises for that quarter. There was real force in the contention that if the landlord could retain the advance rent it would be unfairly prejudicial to the tenant. Further, the parties had agreed the terms of the break clause not knowing whether the break dates would be after, before or even on a quarter day. That supported the notion that they were unlikely to have intended the apportioned rent be retained by the landlord as part of the compensation for the operation of the break clause (paras 33-34).
HELD (3) Factors against an implied term - The lease was a very detailed document, entered into between experienced parties and drafted by expert solicitors. The established legal background against which the lease was entered into was also relevant. Rent was not apportionable in time in common law. That position had been remedied to a certain extent by the Apportionment Act 1870 s.2 in relation to rent paid in arrears. However, s.2 did not apply to rent payable in advance, Ellis v Rowbotham [1900] 1 Q.B. 740 approved (paras 38, 42-44).
HELD (4) Outcome - Save in a very clear case, it would be wrong to attribute to a landlord and tenant an intention that the tenant should receive an apportioned part of the rent paid in advance, when the non-apportionability of such rent had been so clearly established for so long. Express words would be needed before it would be right to imply a term to the contrary. The tenant's appeal therefore failed in relation to the advance payments of rent, car parking and insurance (paras 50, 55).
HELD (5) Service charge - The position in relation to the service charge was different as the lease enabled the service charge to be apportioned (para.55).
HELD (6) (Per Lord Carnwath) The judgment in Belize had stimulated more than usual academic controversy, but that was not sufficient to question its continuing authority, Belize considered (para.74).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger PSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Sumption JSC; Lord Carnwath JSC; Lord Hodge JSC
COUNSEL For the appellant: Guy Fetherstonhaugh QC, Kester Lees. For the respondents: Nicholas Dowding QC, Mark Sefton.





NAME (wl) Berkoff v Burchill and The Times
CITATION Berkoff v Burchill and The Times [1996] 4 All ER 1008
CIT [1996] 4 All ER 1008
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts; Defamation
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Libel; reputation; derogatory reference to actor's physical appearance; whether words were capable of being defamatory was matter for jury
SUMMARY The defendant appealed against a decision refusing an application under the Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.14A for a ruling that using the term "hideously ugly" was not capable of being defamatory, as alleged in B's statement of claim. Two film reviews, written by the defendant and published in a Sunday newspaper, made deprecatory remarks about the physical appearance of B, an actor and director, who contended that these were intended to mean he was ugly in a way that exposed him to ridicule and that he was liable to be shunned as a result. The defendant argued that injury to feelings or annoyance caused by a statement was not relevant to the issue of defamation, which was defined solely by whether the words used were capable of causing injury to a person's reputation.
HELD dismissing the appeal, that words could be defamatory even if they did not impute disgraceful behaviour or deficiencies in the conduct of business or professional activities. In B's case, the test required was whether the words were defamatory when read in context by an ordinary reader. In libel, the words were not to be construed by reference to the publisher's intention, although this could colour their meaning, but by the reader's reaction to them. As a result, a jury might conclude that the context in which the remarks appeared might give an impression that B, a person in the public eye, was repulsive, and it was wrong to decide such a preliminary issue by withdrawing the matter completely from a jury's consideration. Millett, L.J., dissenting, held that words used in jest should not be actionable. Even though the words used were meant to ridicule B, they did not make him look ridiculous or lower his reputation in the eyes of the public and in this sense they were not defamatory.
JUDGE Neill LJ; Millett LJ; Phillips LJ
COUNSEL For B: Manuel Barca. For the defendants: James Price Q.C.





NAME (wl) Thornton v Telegraph Media Group Ltd
CITATION Thornton v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2010] EWHC 1414 (QB)
CIT [2010] EWHC 1414 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Media and Entertainment; Authors; Defamatory Meaning; Fair Comment; Justification; Libel; Newspapers; Reputation; Ridicule; Summary Judgments
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The applicant newspaper (X) applied for summary judgment of an action for libel commenced by the respondent book author (T).
ABSTRACT Whilst researching her book, T had conducted several interviews. X had published an unfavourable review of the book, in which it stated among other things that T had given her interviewees the right to read what she proposed to say about them and alter it, which was known by journalists as "copy approval" and very much disapproved of. T considered X's statement to have a defamatory meaning. She maintained in her particulars of claim that the statement also suggested a second defamatory meaning, namely that she had shown herself to be untrustworthy and fatally lacking in integrity and credibility as a researcher and writer. The court was required to determine, for the purposes of both CPR r.24.2 and CPR PD 53 4.1(2) whether T had a real prospect of establishing that the relevant words were defamatory of her.
ABSTRACT X submitted that in order to be actionable as business defamation and defeat defences of justification and fair comment, words had to do more than injure a claimant in the way of their office, profession or trade. X contended that as copy approval was not illegal or contrary to any professional code, the allegation did not amount to business libel because it was not serious enough to pass the required threshold of seriousness. T argued that the allegation was business or professional libel because it undermined her integrity as a professional writer and that to impute incompetence in a claimant's profession was sufficient to constitute defamation.
SUMMARY In the context of defamation, the position of professional writers could be compared to the position of professional sportsmen in Dee v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2010] EWHC 924 (QB), [2010] E.M.L.R. 20; writers were free to direct different products to different readerships or markets. As long as the true position was made clear by the writer to the prospective reading public, the standards to which a writer wrote were simply a matter of choice of one product over another and therefore to impute to a writer that they wrote to one standard rather than another could not of itself be defamatory.
HELD Application granted.
HELD (1) Business defamation, as defined in Berkoff v Burchill [1996] 4 All E.R. 1008 and in Duncan & Neil on Defamation, 3rd edn Ch 4, where it was dealt with almost as a separate tort, envisaged a claim for libel succeeding which might not involve any adverse reflection on the personal qualities of the claimant, Berkoff followed. Regardless of whether there was a separate tort of "business defamation" such cases did require separate consideration. Clearly a distinction had to be made between an imputation upon the goods or products of a professional or business person and an imputation upon the person himself, since the only cause of action available for the former would be malicious falsehood, South Hetton Coal Co Ltd v North Eastern News Association Ltd [1894] 1 Q.B. 133 considered. There was however, a danger of reading too much into Lord Esher's example of the wine merchant in South Hetton , since no reference was made in that case to the fact that business men and professionals, including writers, could choose to deal in or produce different products directed to different markets. Some professionals had to work to a specific professional standard, but others, such as writers, were free to direct different products to different readerships or markets. As long as the true position was made clear by the writer to the prospective reading public, the standards to which a writer wrote were simply a matter of choice of one product over another. To impute to a writer that she wrote to one standard rather than another could not of itself be defamatory, Drummond-Jackson v British Medical Association [1970] 1 W.L.R. 688 considered and Dee v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2010] EWHC 924 (QB), [2010] E.M.L.R. 20 applied. In the instant case, the copy approval allegation was not capable of being a personal libel since it related only to T's professional practices, nor was it capable of being professional libel, Derbyshire CC v Times Newspapers Ltd [1993] A.C. 534 applied. There was some similarity between the position of writers and the position of sportsmen in Dee, but it was not possible to translate the principles in cases such as South Hetton and Drummond-Jackson to the arena of professional writing. (2) Whatever definition of "defamatory" in Berkoff was adopted, and regardless of whether the defamation was business or professional or some other type of defamation, it had to include a qualification or threshold of seriousness so as to exclude trivial claims, Sim v Stretch [1936] 2 All E.R. 1237, Ecclestone v Telegraph Media Group Ltd [2009] EWHC 2779 (QB) and Jameel v Dow Jones & Co Inc [2005] EWCA Civ 75, [2005] Q.B. 946 applied. The court gave guidance about how the definitions in Berkoff should be construed and/or elaborated so as to give effect to the threshold of seriousness.
JUDGE Tugendhat J
COUNSEL For the respondent: Justin Rushbrooke. For the applicant: David Price.





NAME (wl) Cooke v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd
CITATION Cooke v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd [2014] EWHC 2831 (QB)
CIT [2014] EWHC 2831 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Defamatory Meaning; Preliminary Issues; Publication
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The court was required to determine preliminary issues in a defamation claim brought by the claimants (C and M) against the defendants (X) following the publication of a newspaper article.
ABSTRACT C was the CEO of M, a private housing association, and both had been mentioned in an article that focussed on a landlord who was said to have been benefitting from letting sub-standard properties to tenants on benefits. The article mentioned C's salary and the location of her home. An online version of the article was published but was subsequently deleted. Following the exchange of correspondence between the parties, X published an apology. A deputy master ordered the trial of two preliminary issues, namely (i) the defamatory meaning of the words, particularly in the context of the entire article, and (ii) whether the article had caused serious harm to the reputations of either or both of the claimants within the meaning of the Defamation Act 2013 s.1.
ABSTRACT The claimants submitted that the article was about "slum landlords" who were benefitting from squalid properties in "benefits street" and that they were part of the "rogue's gallery" in the article.
SUMMARY The court, as a preliminary issue, determined the defamatory meaning of words complained of in a defamation claim but determined that the claimants had not demonstrated serious harm to their reputations as required by the Defamation Act 2013 s.1.
HELD Preliminary issues determined.
HELD (1) A reasonable reader would not think that M was being depicted as a "slum landlord". The natural and ordinary meaning of the words complained of was that (a) M, whose chief executive was C, was one of the well-off landlords of rented properties on a particular street who let houses to people in receipt of housing benefit at rents of up to 650 per month, thereby making money from the misery of those residents; and that (b) C was personally responsible for that conduct of M, and had herself profited and become rich from it, in that she was paid 179,000 a year and lived in a large house in Gloucestershire. The apology was sufficient in the mind of the hypothetical reader to eradicate or at least minimise any unfavourable impression of M or C created by the original article in the mind of the hypothetical reasonable reader who read both. That left a residual class of readers of the original article who had not read the apology. As far as the latter group was concerned, it was important to note that the apology was now far more accessible on internet searches than the original article. Only someone actively trying to find the unamended article might come across it. The apology was not relevant to meaning, but was relevant to the issue of serious harm. The claimants accepted that there was no specific evidence that the article had caused serious harm to their reputation so far and such serious harm could not be inferred. They had also failed to show that it was more likely than not to cause serious harm to their reputations in the future (see paras 17,19, 21-22, 44-45 of judgment).
JUDGE Bean J
COUNSEL For the claimants: Hugh Tomlinson QC. For the defendants: David Price QC.





NAME (wl) Ames v The Spamhaus Project Ltd
CITATION Ames v The Spamhaus Project Ltd [2015] EWHC 127 (QB)
CIT [2015] EWHC 127 (QB)
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Civil Procedure; Amendments; Email; Jurisdiction; Libel; Particulars of Claim; Proportionality; Reputation; Striking Out; Unsolicited Communications
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The defendant (S), an English not-for-profit organisation, applied for an order striking out a libel claim brought against it by the claimant (C). C, who was resident in the US, cross-applied for permission to re-amend his statement of case so as to include a complaint of libel by publication in the US.
ABSTRACT S reported on sources of spam on the internet. C, who operated a bulk email marketing services business, brought proceedings on the basis that he had been named as a spammer on S's register of Known Spam Offenders (the ROKSO list) and at the top of its list of the Top 10 world's worst spammers. C claimed damages and an injunction. S sought to strike out the claim on the basis that it was an abuse of the court's process, relying on the principles first established in Jameel v Dow Jones & Co Inc [2005] EWCA Civ 75, [2005] Q.B. 946, where it was held that defamation proceedings would be dismissed as an abuse if they did not serve the legitimate purpose of protecting a claimant's reputation.
ABSTRACT S argued that C had no significant reputation in England and Wales; that the extent of publication within England and Wales was minimal or insignificant; that the publications had not caused, nor were likely to cause, C to suffer any substantial or serious harm; and that publication had ceased and there was no intention to republish.
SUMMARY The court refused to strike out a libel claim brought by a US resident who operated a bulk email marketing services business against an English organisation which had reported the claimant as an illegal spammer. The claimant had a real prospect of demonstrating that the publication within England and Wales might be read by people whose opinion was of serious consequence to him and his business prospects, and that it had therefore caused serious harm to his reputation.
HELD Application refused, cross-application granted.
HELD (1) The Jameel jurisdiction was exceptional; the assessment of whether a real and substantial tort had been committed was not a "numbers game". Even publication to a single individual could be highly damaging and make a substantial and costly libel action proportionate, Haji-Ioannou v Dixon [2009] EWHC 178 (QB) applied, Jameel followed. The Jameel principles were not solely applicable to libel claims but were of general application. The court had to have regard to its duty under the CPR to deal with cases justly and at proportionate cost. However, if a libel claimant had a real prospect of establishing a tort which was real and substantial, the court should be very reluctant to conclude that it could not be adjudicated in a proportionate way and that the only remaining way of dealing justly with the case was to dismiss it, Sullivan v Bristol Film Studios Ltd [2012] EWCA Civ 570, [2012] C.P. Rep. 34 followed (see paras 28, 33-34, 36 of judgment). (2) Although an individual suing for libel did not have to show an established reputation, whether a publication which created a bad reputation for someone who was previously unknown, or little known, amounted to a real and substantial tort would depend on circumstances such as the nature of the statement itself, the gravity of its meaning, and the nature and extent of its publication. Moreover, a publisher was responsible for damage caused by re-publications which were the natural and probably or reasonably foreseeable consequence of its own publication. It was a feature of the internet that material once published might remain accessible for a considerable time even if removed from the original site, as had happened in the instant case where the sting of the words complained of remained on third party sites for months afterwards. After January 1, 2014, the Defamation Act 2013 s.1 introduced the additional requirement that the harm suffered to the reputation of the claimant had to be "serious". That had to be the starting point in relation to publications after that date, before the "real and substantial" test was applied. Thus, s.1 did not supersede Jameel (paras 40, 45-51). (3) C had a real prospect of showing that S had published the allegation complained of to all those who read the pages in question; of establishing that a meaning imputing involvement in illegal spamming was conveyed to those readers; and of demonstrating that the publication within England and Wales had caused serious harm to his reputation. It was common ground that S was considered authoritative and reliable; therefore, what it said about those on the ROKSO and Top 10 lists was very likely to be taken as true and relied on by readers. Nor was it possible to say that publication in England and Wales was inconsequential. C had past business connections in England which might be substantial and material; moreover, he had plans to launch a business with a UK presence. Although there had not yet been disclosure or a full examination of the evidence, C therefore had a real prospect of establishing that the words complained of might be read by people whose opinion was of serious consequence to him and his business prospects. That might be enough to establish serious harm to reputation. C had also demonstrated sufficient grounds to fear that, unless restrained, S would further publish words to the same effect as those complained of, since S evidently did not accept that what it published was wrong (paras 62, 92, 94, 97). (4) As it was not plain and obvious that C was unable to establish the existence of serious harm to his reputation in the US, he was granted permission to re-amend the particulars of claim to plead a claim in libel in respect of publication in the US (para.107).
JUDGE Warby J
COUNSEL For the claimants: Adrienne Page QC, Jacob Dean. For the defendants: Ian Helme.





NAME (wl) Baturina v Times Newspapers
CITATION Baturina v Times Newspapers [2011] EWCA Civ 308
CIT [2011] EWCA Civ 308
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Foreseeability; Innuendos; Libel; Newspapers; Russia; Striking Out; Websites
ABSTRACT The appellant Russian businesswoman (B) appealed against a decision ([2010] EWHC 696 (QB), [2010] E.M.L.R. 18) to strike out her libel claim against the respondent newspaper (T) in respect of certain classes of reader. T cross-appealed against the decision not to strike out the whole claim.
ABSTRACT T had published, in print and on its website, a story suggesting that B had bought a large house in London through a front company. Shortly afterwards, T accepted that that was incorrect, published a correction, and removed the online article. B alleged that the article was defamatory on the basis of innuendo in that Russian law required officials and their spouses to declare their assets publicly, and readers would infer that B, the wife of the then mayor of Moscow, had failed to include the house in her declaration as required. There were four classes of reader to whom publication was alleged, namely readers of (i) the newspaper in England; (ii) the newspaper in Russia; (iii) the online article; (iv) foreseeable re-publications in Russia. The judge allowed the claim to proceed in respect of the second and fourth categories on the basis that it could not be said that no-one in those categories would have inferred the alleged innuendo. He struck out the claim in respect of the other two categories.
ABSTRACT T argued that (1) a defendant could not be liable in defamation where that was based on an innuendo which he had not appreciated, and could not reasonably have been expected to appreciate, at the time of the statement; (2) the claim should have been struck out in full, not merely in part; (3) if the claim was to proceed, B should be required to identify specific individuals who had inferred the innuendo.
SUMMARY A libel claim based on an innuendo was allowed to proceed, but the claimant was required to identify specific individuals who had inferred the innuendo from the alleged defamatory statement.
HELD Appeal allowed, cross-appeal allowed in part.
HELD (1) T's argument was inconsistent with several authorities. Those authorities mostly involved 'reference innuendos', where statements were defamatory on their face but knowledge of extrinsic facts was required to link them to the claimant, rather than "meaning innuendos" such as in the instant case, where statements were only rendered defamatory by knowledge of extrinsic facts. However, the reasoning in those cases applied equally to both forms of innuendo, E Hulton & Co v Jones [1910] A.C. 20, Cassidy v Daily Mirror Newspapers Ltd [1929] 2 K.B. 331, Hough v London Express Newspaper Ltd [1940] 2 K.B. 507 and Fullam v Newcastle Chronicle & Journal Ltd [1977] 1 W.L.R. 651 applied. The European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.10 did not compel a change in the law regarding innuendo: the availability of a Reynolds defence was, save perhaps in exceptional circumstances, sufficient acknowledgment by the courts of the need for protection of the press above the previous defence of fair comment, Joseph v Spiller [2010] UKSC 53, [2011] 1 A.C. 852 applied (see paras 21-28 of judgment). (2) There was no fault with the judge's reasoning in respect of the second and fourth reader categories, but he had been wrong not to reach the same conclusion regarding the other categories. There were 400,000 Russians in the United Kingdom, some of whom might be in touch with events in Russia and some of whom might read the newspaper: one could not say the claim was bound to fail in that regard. Similar reasoning applied to online readers (paras 34-39). (3) Where meaning innuendo was alleged, the claimant ought to specify the persons with the knowledge from which they inferred the innuendo, Grappelli v Derek Block (Holdings) Ltd [1981] 1 W.L.R. 822 applied. In relation to the first category, although the newspaper had a wide circulation, there was no evidence of a wide circulation among Russians in England. The court would not find for B without specific readers who had appreciated the innuendo on reading the article being called, and it would be unfair on T not to require B to identify such readers. The same conclusion applied to readers in the other categories. Such readers would have to be produced at trial and be credible witnesses (paras 46-50).
JUDGE Lord Neuberger MR; Sedley LJ; Hooper LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Romie Tager QC, Justin Rushbrooke. For the respondent: Andrew Caldecott QC, Manuel Barca.





NAME (wl) Lewis v Daily Telegraph Ltd
CITATION Lewis v Daily Telegraph Ltd [1964] AC 234
CIT [1964] AC 234
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Civil Evidence; Interpretation; Jury Directions; Libel; Newspapers
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Defamatory meaning;
SUMMARY In a libel action the judge must rule whether the words are capable of bearing each of the defamatory meanings, if there be more than one, put forward by the plaintiff, whether expressly pleaded or not, if such meanings are alleged to be inferred from the natural and ordinary meaning of the words used. The defendants printed articles stating that the Fraud Squad were inquiring into the affairs of the plaintiff company. The chairman and the company issued writs against the two defendant newspapers. The statements of claim alleged that the words were defamatory in their ordinary and natural meaning. By para.4 it was pleaded that the words meant and were understood to mean that the plaintiffs had been guilty of, or were suspected by the police of being guilty of, fraud or dishonesty. Particulars pursuant to Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.19 r.6(2) , did not support the meaning pleaded in para.4 by extrinsic facts but were inferences from the words complained of. No plea of special damage was included. The defendants pleaded justification, in that it was true that on December 23, 1958, the police were inquiring into the affairs of the company. They denied that the words meant or were capable of meaning that the plaintiffs were guilty of or suspected of fraud. At the trials before Salmon J. and juries evidence showed that the police were inquiring into the affairs of the company on the said date. Salmon J. directed the jury that the words could bear the meaning alleged in the innuendo, but did not point out the absence of any cogent evidence as to financial loss. He left to the jury only two questions, (1) whether they found for the plaintiffs or for the defendants, and (2) if for the plaintiffs, what sums of damages. The two juries awarded a total of GBP 217,000 damages.
HELD allowing the appeal and ordering new trials, (1) that in a libel action the judge must rule whether the words are capable of bearing each of the defamatory meanings put forward; (2) that an ordinary man would not have inferred guilt of fraud from the words and the jury should have been directed that they were not capable of bearing this meaning (Lord Morris dissenting); (3) that the damages awarded in each case were excessive; in such a case pursuant to the Defamation Act 1952 s.12 , each jury should be directed to consider how far the damage is attributable solely to the libel with which they are concerned and how far it is the joint result of the two libels, so that the plaintiff will not be compensated twice for the same loss;.
JUDGE Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest; Lord Hodson; Lord Devlin; Lord Reid; Lord Jenkins





NAME (wl) Morgan v Odhams Press Ltd
CITATION Morgan v Odhams Press Ltd [1971] 1 WLR 1239
CIT [1971] 1 WLR 1239
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Civil Evidence; Civil Procedure; Defamation; Evidence; Identification; Measure of Damages
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Innuendo; extrinsic evidence
SUMMARY There is no rule that, before an article can be said to be defamatory of a person it must contain some "key or pointer" indicating that it refers to him, and where necessary extrinsic evidence is admissible to import a defamatory meaning to words otherwise innocent. In 1965 a newspaper reported that a kennel-girl had been kidnapped by members of a dog-doping gang. In or about the relevant period witnesses had seen her in M's company. The newspaper article made no reference to M by name or description. He began an action against the newspaper, pleading that he had been libelled by innuendo. In interlocutory proceedings by the newspaper to have the action struck out, the Court of Appeal, in 1967, allowed it to go forward on the ground that it was "arguable" that a jury could conclude that the report referred to M but that much would depend on the evidence. At the trial, the judge declined to withdraw the case from the jury, holding himself bound by the Court of Appeal's decision to treat the words as capable of being understood to refer to M. and the jury found for M and awarded him damages to GBP 4,750.
HELD (1) the trial judge was wrong in holding that as a matter of law he was bound by the decision of the Court of Appeal in interlocutory proceedings; all that could be inferred from the court's decision was that the case was not unarguable; (2) he was, nevertheless, right in allowing the case to go to the jury, since, inter alia, extrinsic evidence was admissible where necessary to import a defamatory meaning to words otherwise innocent; (3) the award of damages was excessive and a new trial should be ordered on the issue of quantum of damages. ( Cassidy v Daily Mirror Newspapers Ltd [1929] 2 K.B. 331 considered; and Hough v London Express Newspaper Ltd [1940] 2 K.B. 507 considered; Astaire v Campling [1966] 1 W.L.R. 34 distinguished).
JUDGE Lord Reid; Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest; Lord Guest; Lord Donovan; Lord Pearson





NAME (wl) O'Shea v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd
CITATION O'Shea v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd [2001] EMLR 40
CIT [2001] EMLR 40
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Advertisements; Freedom of Expression; Libel; Photographs; Strict Liability
SUMMARY The imposition of strict liability for unintentional defamation by the publication of a "look alike" photograph was an unjustifiable interference with the right to freedom of expression under the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.10.
SUMMARY Following the publication in a Sunday newspaper of an advertisement for a pornographic website, O brought an action against MGN for defamation. She alleged that a photograph used in the advert looked so like her that people who knew her would reasonably have thought that it was her. The issue arose as to whether the imposition of strict liability for unintentional defamation by the publication of a "look alike" photograph was an infringement of the right to freedom of expression under the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.10.
HELD giving judgment for MGN, that the imposition of strict liability for unintentional defamation by the publication of a "look alike" photograph was an unjustifiable interference with the right to freedom of expression. Such a restriction could not be justified under Art.10(2) as necessary in a democratic society given the absence of a pressing social need. The deliberate use of a "look alike" photograph would constitute a malicious falsehood and that remedy provided adequate protection to an individual's reputation.
JUDGE Morland J
COUNSEL For O: Geoffrey Shaw Q.C. For MGN and the second defendant: Mark Warby.





NAME (wl) Grobbelaar v News Group Newspapers Ltd
CITATION Grobbelaar v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2002] UKHL 40
CIT [2002] UKHL 40
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Corruption; Football; Interpretation; Justification; Libel; Newspapers; Nominal Damages; Verdicts
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Interpretation of jury's verdict - Newspaper allegation that goalkeeper took bribes to fix games - Jury found for claimant and awarded substantial damages - Court of Appeal wrong to set aside decision as perverse - Correct interpretation of jury's verdict was that they found that newspaper had not justified sting of articles to effect that claimant actually fixed matches - Evidence clearly showed that claimant had agreed and accepted money to fix games and on that basis damages award should be reduced to GBP 1.
SUMMARY G, a former professional footballer, appealed against a decision of the Court of Appeal ([2001] EWCA Civ 33, [2001] 2 All E.R. 437) quashing a finding that N had libelled him. G's reputation was destroyed following articles in a newspaper published by N stating that he had taken bribes in order to fix football matches. The articles concerned were supported by covert video recordings in which G commented that he had previously fixed games and in which he was seen to accept GBP 2,000 in cash. The trial jury found that N had libelled G and awarded him substantial damages in the sum of GBP 85,000. The Court of Appeal considered the jury's verdict to be irreconcilable with the evidence presented and therefore perverse.
HELD allowing the appeal (Lord Steyn dissenting), that the jury's verdict should be reinstated but the award of damages reduced to the nominal sum of GBP 1. A decision to overturn the verdict of a jury could only be taken in exceptional circumstances where the jury's decision could not be explained on any ground not indicative of perversity. In the instant case it seemed safe to infer that the jury had found insufficient justification for the defamatory allegations. Its verdict had not therefore been perverse. The jury had, however, erred in its quantification of damages. The jury had interpreted the libellous sting of the material to lie in the claim that G had actually fixed matches, a claim that could not be justified given evidence to the contrary. However, although an actionable libel had occurred, G should not receive substantial damages as he had acted in flagrant breach of his legal and moral obligations by accepting money to fix games.
JUDGE Lord Bingham of Cornhill; Lord Steyn; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough; Lord Millett; Lord Scott of Foscote
COUNSEL For G: Richard Hartley Q.C. and Sarah Palin. For N: Richard Spearman Q.C.





NAME (wl) Telnikoff v Matusevich
CITATION Telnikoff v Matusevich [1992] 2 AC 343
CIT [1992] 2 AC 343
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Civil Evidence; Defences; Libel
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Fair comment; plaintiff's article in newspaper; letter in response alleged to be defamatory; whether letter to be read in conjunction with article or in isolation
SUMMARY A letter alleged to be defamatory, written in response to a previously published article, must be read in isolation, not in conjunction with the article, when determining whether the words complained of were capable of constituting statements of fact. P, a Russian emigre employed by the BBC, wrote an article published in a newspaper. D, also a Russian emigre, wrote a letter in reaction which was published in the same newspaper. The letter imputed racist opinions to P and was the subject of a libel claim. D pleaded fair comment, and P alleged express malice. At the end of P's case a submission of no case was accepted, the judge finding that the contents of the letter read as a whole were pure comment.
HELD allowing the appeal in part, that the question whether the words complained of were capable of constituting statements of fact was to be determined by consideration of the contents of the letter alone and not in conjunction with the terms of the article in response to which it was written, since many of the readers of the letter would not have read the article (Kemsley v Foot [1952] A.C. 345 considered).
JUDGE Lord Keith of Kinkel; Lord Brandon of Oakbrook; Lord Templeman; Lord Ackner; Lord Oliver of Aylmerton





NAME (wl) British Chiropractic Association v Singh
CITATION British Chiropractic Association v Singh [2010] EWCA Civ 350
CIT [2010] EWCA Civ 350
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Chiropractors; Fair Comment; Libel; Meaning; Opinion Evidence; Scientific Uncertainty; Sufficiency of Evidence
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant scientist and science writer (S) appealed against the judge's determination of alleged defamatory words made by him about the respondent chiropractic association.
ABSTRACT The association, whose objects included promoting and maintaining high standards of conduct and practice among chiropractors in the United Kingdom, had contended that it had been defamed in an article written by S that was published on the "Comment and Debate" page of a newspaper. The article stated that the association claimed that its members could help treat particular ailments, even though there was no evidence. Determining preliminary issues, the judge held that, to a reasonable reader, the words would mean that the association claimed that chiropractic was effective in helping to treat the stated ailments although it knew that there was absolutely no evidence to support its claim and that by making those claims the association knowingly supported bogus treatments. He also held that the words amounted to assertions of verifiable fact, not expressions of opinion. If that was so, S would not be able, at trial, to rely on the defence of fair comment, but would have to prove that the meanings were factually true or to lose. The issues in the case were whether (i) the instant court was free to interfere with the judge's decision as to the meaning of the words; (ii) the words amounted to fact or opinion.
SUMMARY Where the relevant data on the extent of the benefits of chiropractic was heavily and legitimately in contest, an alleged defamatory statement that the British Chiropractic Association had no evidence for its claim that its members could treat particular ailments was not a fact but amounted to an opinion that there was no worthwhile evidence to support that claim, and the maker of the statement would be entitled to rely on the defence of fair comment at trial.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) The meaning of the words at issue in a libel action was subject to two controls: a decision reserved to the judge as to whether the defamatory meaning alleged by the claimant fell within the range of possible meaning conveyed by the words in their context, and a decision, traditionally reserved to the jury, as to their actual meaning. The former was regarded as a question of law, the latter as one of fact, with the result that the meaning eventually decided upon by the jury would be shielded from attack on appeal save where it had crossed the boundary of reasonableness. However, the decision that was traditionally reserved to the jury was a question of fact only because it was made by the jury, and it therefore followed that the court was entitled to retake the judge's decision, Slim v Daily Telegraph [1968] 2 Q.B. 157 followed. (2) The words amounted to opinion. The issue posed by the judge was in reality two distinct issues: firstly, whether there was any evidence to support the material claims, and secondly, if there was not, whether the association's personnel knew that. The judge had erred, both in conflating those two elements of the claim, and in treating the first of them as an issue of verifiable fact. The subject matter of the article was an area of epidemiology in which the relationship of primary fact to secondary fact, and of both to permissible inference, was heavily and legitimately contested. In his defence, S had set out, ailment by ailment and study by study, his reasons for considering that none of the available epidemiological evidence reliably supported the association's claims, and the association had replied in kind asserting that there was some dependable evidence for its claims. It was one thing to defame somebody in terms that could only be defended by proving their truth, but it was another thing to evaluate published material as giving no evidential support to a claim and on the basis of that evaluation to denounce as irresponsible those who made the claim. It was clear therefore, that what "evidence" signified depended heavily on context, and whether such evidence amounted to proof was what scientific opinion was there to debate. If in the course of the debate the view was expressed that there was no evidence for one deduction or another, the natural meaning was that there was no worthwhile or reliable evidence for it. That was as much a value judgment as a contrary viewpoint would be. If the judge's decision was to stand, it would not be open to the trial judge to conclude that what the evidence amounted to was a matter of opinion, as it would already have been decided that the existence or non-existence of evidence for the claims made by the association was a verifiable fact. It followed that the natural meaning of the words was not that the association was promoting what it knew to be bogus treatments, but that it was promoting what S contended were bogus treatments without regard to the want of reliable evidence of their efficacy.
JUDGE Lord Judge LCJ; Lord Neuberger MR; Sedley LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Adrienne Page QC, William McCormick. For the respondent: Heather Rogers QC.





NAME (wl) Waterson v Lloyd
CITATION Waterson v Lloyd [2013] EWCA Civ 136
CIT [2013] EWCA Civ 136
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Media and Entertainment; Expenses; Honest Comment; Libel; Meaning; Members of Parliament; Publications
ABSTRACT The appellants (L) were a Member of Parliament and his campaign agent. They appealed against a decision ([2011] EWHC 3197 (QB)) that they were guilty of libel against the respondent former MP (W).
ABSTRACT W had lost his seat to L in 2010, following a period when it had been widely reported in the national press that large numbers of MPs had made unlawful expenses claims, breached the parliamentary rules, or made claims which, although within the rules, were essentially improper. During the run-up to the general election, L had distributed two pieces of campaign literature, the first containing a general reference to "the MPs' expenses scandal" and the second referring to "the scandal of MPs abusing their expenses". The first publication referred to W's own "scandalous expenses claims" and both criticised his claim of 70,000 for a home which was 60 miles away from his constituents, and his claim for re-decorating his garage. L relied on the defence of honest comment, on the basis that the "scandal" referred to was confined to the criticism that W had claimed 70,000 for a home that was 60 miles from his constituency, not that his claims constituted a breach of any rules. The judge indicated that it was difficult to follow how a reasonable reader in the circumstances specified in Jeynes v News Magazines Ltd [2008] EWCA Civ 130 could be expected to understand the "scandal" in question to be confined to the mere fact that W made a claim in respect of a mortgage and decoration. He found that the scandal referred to in each publication would reasonably be understood as meaning, and did mean, that W was himself guilty of abuse of the parliamentary rules for his own financial advantage and that those were plainly statements of fact.
ABSTRACT L submitted that the "scandal" comments were clear expressions of opinion, based on non-defamatory facts and that the references to "the MPs' expenses scandal" and "the scandal of MPs abusing their expenses" were comments about the system as a whole, not about W. They argued that there had been no suggestion that W's expenses claims were unlawful, in breach of the rules, or otherwise improper.
SUMMARY Political opponents who had disseminated publications about a Member of Parliament's expenses claims were entitled to rely on the defence of honest comment in a resulting libel claim. References to the expenses claims being "scandalous" did not involve any statement that the MP had broken the law or the parliamentary rules, or had been required to repay sums previously claimed. The publications simply stated what the MP had claimed and the writers' view on that.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (Richards L.J. dissenting) Caution had to be exercised in disturbing findings of fact by judges at first instance in defamation cases. However, the meaning of the words complained of was quite simple: "[W] has claimed nearly 70,000 from the taxpayer for a family home that is 60 miles from Eastbourne (fact). That is a scandal (comment)". There was no statement, express or implied, to be identified in the publications to the effect that W had either broken the law or the parliamentary rules, or had been required to repay sums previously claimed. The reasonable reader would be well aware that there had been a significant criticism of the system of parliamentary expenses and that some MPs might have broken the law or the parliamentary rules, or might merely have made substantial claims strictly within the rules of the criticised system. However, all that had been stated was what W had claimed and the writers' view that that was "a scandal" or "scandalous". The conduct upon which comment was advanced had been clearly identified, Joseph v Spiller [2010] UKSC 53, [2011] 1 A.C. 852 applied, Myerson v Smith's Weekly Publishing Co Ltd considered. The judge had mischaracterised the matter: there was no allegation of scandal beyond the stated facts and the fact that there was thought to be a wider "scandal" did not alter that position. Those who thought that some claims to expenses, even within the law and the rules, were "scandalous" would not have strayed beyond comment if they identified the precise claims made and said that, in their view, they were scandalous. Deciding the matter in accordance with common sense and first impression, the matters complained of were comment, Jeynes and Slim v Daily Telegraph [1968] 2 Q.B. 157 applied (see paras 50-61 of judgment).
JUDGE Laws LJ; Richards LJ; McCombe LJ
COUNSEL For the appellants: Richard Rampton QC, Ian Helme. For the respondent: Desmond Browne QC, David Hirst.





NAME (wl) Spiller v Joseph
CITATION Spiller v Joseph [2010] UKSC 53
CIT [2010] UKSC 53
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Defamation; Defamatory Statements; Defences; Fair Comment; Libel
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The second appellant company (E) appealed against a decision ([2009] EWCA Civ 1075, [2010] I.C.R. 642) that it was not entitled to rely on the defence of fair comment in a libel action brought against it by the respondent members of a musical act (J).
ABSTRACT E had promoted J's shows for a time. A booking at the Landmarc Hotel which E had arranged had been cancelled by J shortly after it was made. A booking at Bibis Restaurant had resulted in a re-booking, which J arranged directly with the venue rather than through E, as was required by a re-engagement clause in the parties' contract. E stopped representing J and published a posting on its website which contained a partially misquoted extract from an email sent by J to E. The posting stated that J were not professional enough to feature in E's portfolio, and had not been able to abide by the terms of their contract. It also stated that "following a breach of contract", J had advised E that the terms and conditions of contracts held no water in legal terms. The Court of Appeal held that the defence of fair comment should not be permitted to stand on the strength of the alleged breach of contract in relation to the Landmarc booking, as it had occurred 14 months before the alleged breach which had led to the publication. The court also held that the Bibis breach could not be relied upon, as the contract and the term allegedly breached had not been identified in the publication. In reaching that conclusion, the court relied on Lord Nicholls' fourth proposition in relation to fair comment in Tse Wai Chun Paul v Cheng [2001] E.M.L.R. 31, namely: "the comment must explicitly or implicitly indicate, at least in general terms, what are the facts on which the comment is being made. The reader or hearer should be in a position to judge for himself how far the comment was well founded". E and the interveners, who represented newspaper and broadcasting interests, invited the instant court to develop the common law of fair comment so that it was simplified and liberalised.
ABSTRACT E submitted that it did not matter that the readers of the posting had no knowledge of the facts in relation to the two breaches of contract referred to, and were unable to judge for themselves how far the comment was well founded. E argued that Lord Nicholls' fourth proposition was inconsistent with the judgment in Kemsley v Foot [1952] A.C. 345.
SUMMARY Lord Nicholls' fourth proposition in relation to fair comment in Tse Wai Chun Paul v Cheng [2001] E.M.L.R. 31 was incorrect in that it required that the comment must identify the matters on which it was based with sufficient particularity to enable the reader to judge for himself whether it was well founded. It should be rewritten as "Next the comment must explicitly or implicitly indicate, at least in general terms, the facts on which it was based".
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) Lord Nicholls' fourth proposition in Cheng could not be reconciled with Kemsley . Where adverse comment was made generally or generically on matters that were in the public domain, it was not a prerequisite of the defence of fair comment that the readers should be in a position to evaluate the comment for themselves, Kemsley followed, Cheng explained and Lowe v Associated Newspapers Ltd [2006] EWHC 320 (QB), [2007] Q.B. 580 considered. It was now possible for people to make public comment about others via the internet, and millions of people took advantage of that opportunity: it would often be impossible for readers to evaluate derogatory comments without detailed information about the facts that had given rise to the comments. If Lord Nicholls' fourth proposition were to apply, the defence of fair comment would be robbed of much of its efficacy. Lord Nicholls was not correct to require that the comment must identify the matters on which it was based with sufficient particularity to enable the reader to judge for himself whether it was well founded; however, the comment must identify at least in general terms what it was that led the commentator to make it. The fourth proposition should be rewritten as "Next the comment must explicitly or implicitly indicate, at least in general terms, the facts on which it was based" (see paras 90-105 of judgment). (2) The reforms suggested by E and the interveners would radically alter the nature of the defence of fair comment, and would not necessarily serve to simplify defamation actions. The proposed reforms went beyond changes that could properly be made by the Supreme Court in the orderly development of the common law. There was, however, a case for reform, and the whole area merited consideration by the Law Commission, or an expert committee. The only reform that should be made by the instant judgment was one that had already received judicial approval in the case of Reynolds v Times Newspapers Ltd [2001] 2 A.C. 127: the defence of fair comment should be renamed "honest comment", Reynolds referred to (paras 110-117). (3) E's defence of fair comment should be reinstated. E could not rely upon the Landmarc breach to support the defence: the Landmarc breach was not referred to in the posting, nor did it form part of a generic allegation of misconduct. E could, however, rely on the Bibis breach: the posting sufficiently identified the breach as part of the subject matter of the comment, albeit that the breach was not particularised.
JUDGE Lord Phillips JSC; Lord Rodger JSC; Lord Walker JSC; Lord Brown JSC; Lord Dyson JSC
COUNSEL For the appellants: David Price (Solicitor Advocate). For the respondents: William Bennett. For the interveners: Andrew Caldecott QC, Sarah Palin.





NAME (wl) A v United Kingdom
CITATION A v United Kingdom (2003) 36 EHRR 51
CIT (2003) 36 EHRR 51
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Human Rights; Discrimination; Margin of Appreciation; Parliamentary Privilege; Proportionality; Right to Fair Trial; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY The rule of parliamentary privilege which protected from a defamation action an MP who had named and described a constituent as a "neighbour from hell" was designed to protect Parliament as a whole and was within the margin of appreciation.
SUMMARY A, a young black woman sought to challenge the rule of absolute parliamentary immunity on the basis that it infringed her right of access to court as enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.6 . A's complaint arose from a parliamentary debate during which A's MP had named her, gave her full address and made adverse comments concerning the behaviour of both A and her children. Following the debate A had received racist hate mail and the local authority were obliged to rehouse her. Her children were also obliged to attend alternative schools. The statement made by the MP was protected under the Bill of Rights 1689 Art.9 and press reports of the proceedings were protected by qualified privilege.
HELD rejecting the complaint, that the rule of absolute parliamentary immunity did not impose a disproportionate restriction on an individual's right of access to the courts. It was inevitable that some restrictions would exist and the immunity granted to United Kingdom MPs was in many respects more limited than that enjoyed by MPs in other European countries. The immunity extended only to statements made by MPs during the course of parliamentary debates and not to any statements made outside Parliament. Accordingly the immunity in question did not exceed the margin of appreciation afforded to individual member states to limit the right under Art.6, Al-Adsani v United Kingdom (35763/97) (2002) 34 E.H.R.R. 11 considered.
JUDGE Judge Costa (President)





NAME (wl) Reynolds v Times Newspapers Ltd
CITATION Reynolds v Times Newspapers Ltd [2001] 1 AC 27
CIT [2001] 1 AC 27
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Landlord and Tenant; Families; Homosexuality; Residential Tenancies; Statutory Interpretation; Succession
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Appeal against dismissal of claim for automatic succession to private residential tenancy following death of long term homosexual partner; contention that appellant should be deemed spouse and member of family of original tenant for purposes of the Rent Act 1977 Sch.1 paras.2 and 3; tenant's homosexual partner could, depending on individual circumstances, be family member but not spouse; a temporary superficial relationship or cohabitation by friends would not establish the necessary familial link
SUMMARY F had lived with his partner, T, in a homosexual relationship for 18 years and sought to succeed to the original protected residential tenancy on T's death. Under the Rent Act 1977 Sch.1 para.3 the right to succession upon the death of the original tenant was granted to the "surviving spouse" or "a member of the original tenant's family". Following amendments made by the Housing Act 1988 , cohabitees were also brought under the definition of "surviving spouse" being granted the right to succeed if they could establish that they had lived with the original tenant "as his or her ...wife or husband". F contended that he should be regarded as T's surviving spouse since, owing to the changing views in modern society, their relationship had been synonymous with the concept of a "marriage" due to its longevity and intimate nature. Secondly, if that was not the case, F argued that he had been living with T as a member of his family since all the necessary ingredients of mutual love, support and interdependency had existed in their relationship.
HELD allowing the appeal (Hutton, L.J. and Hobhouse, L.J. dissenting), that the same sex partner of a protected tenant could be regarded as a member of the family for the purposes of Sch.1 para.3 and thus had the right to succeed to the tenancy on the death of the original tenant. However, a same sex partner could not be regarded as a surviving spouse, since the wording of the statute precluded this interpretation and Parliament could have specifically referred to same sex partners in the 1988 Act if it had intended that they be brought within this provision. The word "family" could be construed very widely in ordinary language and in recent years had not been applied solely to a legal relationship. The intention of the original provision in the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (Restrictions) Act 1920 s.12(1)(g) had been that family members who enjoyed a committed relationship involving mutual love and support with the protected tenant should be protected. The question to be answered was whether in 1994, the date of T's death, the homosexual partner of a protected tenant was intended to fall into that category of family members. In legal family relationships, the law made a presumption that the elements of mutual love, support and interdependency were present, but for any other person seeking to assert that they should be afforded protection as a family member, those elements would have to be established on the facts, R. v Ministry of Defence Ex p. Smith [1996] Q.B. 517 and Barclays Bank Plc v O'Brien [1994] 1 A.C. 180 considered. Despite the fact that this principle had not been accepted by the ECHR under the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8 and Art.12, the statutory provisions would be interpreted to include same sex partners in the definition of family members, since this was in accordance with social justice and recognised the fact that being part of a family represented a profoundly fundamental human relationship which brought with it obligations and benefits. However, for the familial relationship to be established, the relationship between the parties had to be of sufficient longevity and be more than a superficial relationship between friends living as cohabitees or short term sexual partners.
JUDGE Lord Slynn of Hadley; Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead; Lord Clyde; Lord Hutton; Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough
COUNSEL For F: Nicholas Blake Q.C. and Jan Luba. For SHA: Vivian Chapman.





NAME (wl) Clift v Slough BC
CITATION Clift v Slough BC [2010] EWCA Civ 1171
CIT [2010] EWCA Civ 1171
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Family Law; Ancillary Relief; Financial Provision Orders; Fresh Evidence; Lump Sum Payments; Matrimonial Property
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant husband (H) appealed against an award made to the respondent wife (W) in ancillary relief proceedings.
ABSTRACT H and W had been married for over 20 years and had two children, aged 20 and 17. H had inherited substantial wealth, including a large farm estate. The judge identified the important factors in the case, including the nature and value of the assets, the extravagant lifestyle of the parties and the agreement, arrangements or understanding underlying that lifestyle, including the parties' approach to H's inherited wealth. He concluded that H and W had effectively lived off the inherited assets. The judge's objective had been to achieve a fair result, and the principles he applied in order to achieve that were need, compensation and sharing. He took the view that the source of assets, in the instant case the fact that they were inherited by H before the marriage, was a relevant factor. He found H's net worth to be over 22 million and ordered him to pay a lump sum of 8 million to W. He ordered the sale of the farm estate to fund that payment. Periodical payments were ordered to be made until the lump sum was paid in full, when a clean break would be effected. Both parties sought to adduce further evidence for the appeal proceedings relating to events after the making of the order.
SUMMARY The Court of Appeal provided guidance regarding the approach to be taken by courts when considering "big money" ancillary relief cases where the wealth in the marriage was inherited.
HELD Appeal allowed.
HELD (1) When considering "big money" ancillary relief cases where the wealth was inherited, the courts should concentrate on the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 s.25, which imposed a duty on the court to have regard to all the circumstances of a case, with consideration first being given to the welfare of any child of the family who was under the age of 18 and then to the specific factors in s.25(2). Confusion would be avoided if resort was had to the precise language of the statute. The weight to be given to each factor depended on the particular facts and circumstances of each case and, although there was no order of importance, each relevant factor had to be given its due weight. That approach ensured that flexibility was built into the exercise of discretion and as with every exercise of judicial discretion, the objective had to be to reach a just and fair result. Need, compensation and sharing would usually guide that search for fairness. As inherited wealth formed part of the property and financial resources of a party, it had to be taken into account pursuant to s.25(2)(a). The other relevant factors also had to be taken into account but the fact that wealth was inherited and not earned justified it being treated differently from wealth accruing from the joint efforts of the parties. It was not only the source of the wealth which was relevant but its nature. An ancestral castle might deserve different treatment from a farm inherited from a party's father who had acquired it in his lifetime, just as a valuable heirloom was of a different character from an inherited portfolio of stocks and shares. The nature and source of an asset might well be a good reason for departing from equality within the sharing principle. The duration of the marriage and the length of time the wealth had been enjoyed by the parties was also relevant, as was their standard of living and the extent to which it had been afforded and enhanced by drawing down on the added wealth. The way the property was preserved, enhanced or depleted should also be taken into account. When property was acquired before or inherited during a marriage, it might be said that the spouse to whom it had been given should in fairness be allowed to keep it. On the other hand, the more and longer that wealth had been enjoyed, the less fair it was that it should be ring-fenced so as to render it unavailable to meet a party's needs generated by the relationship. Judges should be cautious and not invade inherited property unnecessarily. No formula and no resort to percentages would provide the right answer. Weighing the various factors and striking the balance of fairness was an art, not a science (see para.43 of judgment). (2) There was a bracket within which the judge had to endeavour to find that sum of money which would enable W to enjoy a comfortable life while living independently from H. In endeavouring to be fair to both parties, the right sum to award was a total lump sum of 7 million. Looking at the case in the round, that would leave W well provided for and H could afford to make the payment from the proceeds of sale of the estate. The essential balance between needs and resources would be struck (paras 93-94). (3) The Court of Appeal should be very cautious in admitting fresh evidence of events which had occurred after an order had been made. The criteria established in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 W.L.R. 1489 of former unavailability, important significance and credibility were principally designed for evidence which related to past events. It did not follow that evidence of new events, which by definition was evidence which was not available at trial, should be admitted, Ladd v Marshall considered (para.96).
JUDGE Ward LJ; Hughes LJ; Patten LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Tim Amos QC, Oliver Wise. For the respondent: David Balcombe QC, Nicholas Westley.





NAME (wl) Horrocks v Lowe
CITATION Horrocks v Lowe [1975] AC 135
CIT [1975] AC 135
COURT UKHL
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Councillors; Justification; Malice
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Privilege; qualified privilege; council meeting; honest belief in truth
SUMMARY A statement honestly believed to be true and not made for any improper motive cannot be said to have been made maliciously because of the unreasonableness of the belief. At a local authority council meeting L made a speech defamatory of H who, in answer to L's defence of justification and fair comment, alleged that L had been actuated by express malice. At first instance it was found that the occasion was privileged but that malice had been proved.
HELD dismissing H's appeal, that malice could not be inferred since L held an honest and positive belief in the truth of his statement and had not abused the privileged occasion. (Decision of C.A. affirmed; Clark v Molyneaux (1877) 3 Q.B.D. 237 applied; dictum of Lord Esher, M.R. in Royal Aquarium & Summer & Winter Garden Society Ltd v Parkinson [1892] 1 Q.B. 431 explained).
JUDGE Lord Wilberforce; Lord Diplock; Lord Kilbrandon





NAME (wl) Bryanston Finance Ltd v De Vries (no 1)
CITATION Bryanston Finance Ltd v De Vries (no 1) [1975] QB 703
CIT [1975] QB 703
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation; Employees' Rights; Joint Tortfeasors; Letters; Libel; Privilege
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Privilege; qualified; arising from relationship of employer and employee
SUMMARY When a letter is dictated to a secretary, that publication being from an employer to an employee is covered by a qualified privilege. It does not depend on a common interest and is an original rather than an ancillary privilege. V and C drafted a letter to S which was typed by their secretary and copied by another clerk. It was delivered by hand to S who claimed damages and an injunction. The action was settled by C by means of a consent judgment.
HELD allowing V's appeal that (1) the publication was covered by qualified privilege and that no express malice had been found by the trial judge; (2) that in an action against joint tortfeasors a satisfied consent judgment against one operated as a bar to a judgment for damages against the other.
JUDGE Lord Denning MR; Lord Diplock; Lawton LJ





NAME (wl) Flood v Times Newspapers Ltd
CITATION Flood v Times Newspapers Ltd [2012] UKSC 11
CIT [2012] UKSC 11
COURT UKSC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Media and Entertainment; Freedom of Expression; Libel; Newspapers; Police Officers; Responsible Journalism; Reynolds Defence; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life; Verification
FLAGS Approved
ABSTRACT The appellant newspaper (T) appealed against a decision ([2010] EWCA Civ 804, [2011] 1 W.L.R. 153) that it could not rely on Reynolds privilege to defeat a defamation claim brought by the respondent police officer (F).
ABSTRACT T had published an article in its newspaper and on its website stating that police were investigating whether a senior officer was guilty of taking bribes in exchange for sensitive police information. F was named as the officer under investigation. The police investigation subsequently cleared F, but T did not remove the article from its website. F brought proceedings against T for libel. The Court of Appeal found that T's journalists had failed to adequately verify the allegations of fact contained in the article. The Supreme Court was required to determine: (i) how the court should approach the meaning of a publication when considering a claim to Reynolds privilege; (ii) whether, and in what circumstances, it was in the public interest to refer to the fact that accusations had been made to the police that a named person had committed a criminal offence; (iii) what, if any, steps were required on the part of a responsible journalist to verify the information.
SUMMARY The Supreme Court considered the elements necessary for a successful claim of Reynolds privilege in a defamation claim, in particular, how the court should approach the meaning of a publication, whether it was in the public interest to report allegations of police corruption whilst an investigation was ongoing, and the steps that a reasonable journalist should take to verify the information.
HELD Appeal allowed in part.
HELD (1) Reynolds privilege protected the publication of defamatory matter where it was in the public interest that the information should be published, and the publisher had acted responsibly in publishing it. A claim for Reynolds privilege was often determined as a preliminary issue. However, that could raise a practical problem since in order to perform the balancing act between the desirability of the public receiving the information in question and the potential harm caused if the individual was defamed, it was necessary to determine the meaning of the publication. Meaning was normally a matter for the jury. However, the parties could agree to trial by judge alone. It would then be open to the trial judge to resolve any issues that arose in relation to the meaning of the words published. Further, a responsible journalist should have regard to the full range of meanings that a reasonable reader might attribute to the publication. The claim to Reynolds privilege would have to be assessed having regard to that range of meanings (see paras 2, 48-52 of judgment). (2) F had sought to rely on Purcell v Sowler (1877) 2 C.P.D. 215 and De Buse v McCarthy [1942] 1 K.B. 156, but Tugendhat J was correct to say that it was rather dangerous to rely on cases of such antiquity when dealing with fundamental issues of freedom of speech and respect for private life, Purcell and De Buse doubted. Each case would turn on its own facts and the overriding test was that of responsible journalism. In the instant case, subject to the issue of verification, it was in the public interest that both the accusation and most of the facts that supported it were published. The story, if true, was of high public interest. That interest lay not merely in the fact of police corruption but in the nature of that corruption, Reynolds v Times Newspapers Ltd [2001] 2 A.C. 127 and Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe SPRL (No.3) [2006] UKHL 44, [2007] 1 A.C. 359 applied. It was generally likely to be in the public interest to publish the details of allegations of police corruption, whatever the nature of the alleged corruption, provided that the test of responsible journalism was met. The motivation of T's journalist for publishing the accusation was also relevant. His doubts as to whether the police were exercising due diligence in investigating the allegation might constitute a legitimate aim of publishing, and it was in the public interest to ensure that the investigation was carried out promptly. Naming F had not conflicted with the test of responsible journalism or with the public interest. He would be identified by other members of his unit, and if he were not named, other members of the unit might have come under suspicion (paras 59, 68-74, 155, 169, 179-181, 195). (3) Reportage was a special form of Reynolds privilege which arose where it was not the content of a reported allegation that was of public interest, but the fact that the allegation had been made. The position was quite different where the public interest in the allegation lay in its content and in the fact that it might be true. The responsible journalist had to satisfy himself that the allegation was true; his belief in its truth had to be the result of a reasonable investigation and it had to be a reasonable belief to hold. Where a journalist alleged that there were grounds for suspecting that a person had been guilty of misconduct, he should satisfy himself that such grounds existed, but that did not necessarily require that he should know what those grounds were. Their existence could be based on information from reliable sources, or inferred from the fact of a police investigation. There was a strong circumstantial case against F. The supporting facts and the actions of the police had reasonably satisfied T that there was a serious possibility that F was guilty of corruption. The requirements of responsible journalism had therefore been met (paras 77-81, 99, 158, 167). (4) The second limb of T's appeal, concerning continued publication after the outcome of the police investigation was known, was adjourned (para.107).
JUDGE Lord Phillips JSC; Lord Brown JSC; Lord Mance JSC; Lord Clarke JSC; Lord Dyson JSC
COUNSEL For the appellant: Richard Rampton QC, Heather Rogers QC, Kate Wilson. For the respondent: James Price QC, Willliam Bennett.





NAME (wl) Milne v Express Newspapers Ltd
CITATION Milne v Express Newspapers Ltd [2004] EWCA Civ 664
CIT [2004] EWCA Civ 664
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Defamation Other Related Subjects: Media and Entertainment; Bad Faith; Defences; Libel; Offer of Amends; Recklessness; Rectification; Statutory Provisions
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY The words "reason to believe" in the Defamation Act 1996 s.4(3) were not to be equated with reason to suspect or with constructive knowledge on the part of the person offering to make amends. The provision imported the concept of recklessness enunciated in Horrocks v Lowe [1975] A.C. 175.
SUMMARY The claimant (M) sought permission to appeal against two decisions ([2002] EWHC 2564, [2003] 1 W.L.R. 927, [2003] C.L.Y. 961 and [2003] EWHC 1843) in his defamation action against the defendant newspaper (E). E had published an article written by a journalist (S) that contained words which the parties accepted conveyed the meaning that M was reasonably suspected of giving false evidence to an inquiry by the Parliamentary Standards Commissioner. E had made an unqualified offer to make amends under the Defamation Act 1996 s.2 and made proposals to implement the offer. M rejected the offer and gave reasons for doing so. Consequently, D pleaded the statutory defence under s.4 of the Act. In his reply M sought to rebut that defence alleging, in reliance on s.4(3) of the Act, that S had had "reason to believe that the statement complained of was false". D applied to strike out the part of the reply which relied on s.4(3). In the first judgment the judge decided that a claimant was only able to challenge a s.4 defence where the defendant had chosen to ignore or shut his mind to information which should have led him to believe that the allegation was false. The judge held M's reply was insufficient in law to rebut the s.4 defence and struck out the relevant paragraphs. M applied for permission to amend the reply. D opposed the application, contending that the proposed second version of the pleading still failed to measure up to the requirements of s.4(3). In the second judgment the judge upheld D's contentions and refused M permission to amend his reply and ordered that judgment should be entered for D. M submitted that the judge misconstrued s.4(3) as importing a wholly subjective recklessness or "bad faith" test of the kind required for proof of malice in defamation proceedings.
HELD refusing the first application and allowing the second application in part, but dismissing the appeal, that (1) the judge's interpretation of s.4(3) of the 1996 Act in his first judgment was entirely correct for the reasons which he gave. The words "reason to believe" in s.4(3) imported the concept of recklessness enunciated in Horrocks v Lowe [1975] A.C. 135. The reason for adopting this approach was that where a claimant established malice on the part of a person who published a defamatory statement, he would have the basis for a claim of aggravated, and possibly exemplary, damages. Malice apart, compensation could be fully assessed and awarded under s.3(5) of the Act. There would be little point therefore in relying on s.4(3) unless the requirement there was to establish malice. Recognising that some claimants might prefer a jury trial could not alone have been the parliamentary purpose. The phrase "had reason to believe" required an inquiry into what facts were in a person's head and not into what facts ought to have been in his head. Reason to believe was not to be equated with reason to suspect or with constructive knowledge, Horrocks applied. (2) The judge was right to refuse permission to amend the reply. M's attempt to elevate the proposed amended particulars to a case under s.4(3) fit to go to a jury failed for the reasons given by the judge. M's central submission relied on far too brittle a chain of inferred or imputed reasoning on the part of S. What was required was not an inference but reckless indifference to the truth. The judge was right that there would be no proper basis for a jury to conclude from the amended particulars that S was recklessly indifferent to the truth of the relevant defamatory statement which he published.
JUDGE May LJ; Tuckey LJ; Laws LJ
COUNSEL For the appellant: Richard Parkes QC, William Bennett. For the respondent: Geoffrey Shaw QC, Caroline Addy.





NAME (wl) Steel and Morris v UK
CITATION Steel and Morris v UK [2016] EWCOP 21
CIT [2016] EWCOP 21
COURT EWHC
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Civil Procedure Other Related Subjects: Administration of Justice; Human Rights; Media and Entertainment; Anonymity; Capacity; Death; Duration; Freedom of Expression; Injunctions; Life-Sustaining Treatment; Press; Reporting Restrictions; Right to Respect For Private and Family Life
ABSTRACT The Court of Protection considered its jurisdiction to make a reporting restrictions order after the subject of the proceedings had died, and after previous reporting restrictions orders had ended.
ABSTRACT The deceased was a 50-year-old woman who had refused life-saving treatment. The case had attracted much media attention. The woman was a socialite, described in the press as wanting to die because she thought she had "lost her sparkle" and did not want to grow old. During Court of Protection proceedings to determine her capacity to refuse treatment there had been a reporting restrictions order expressed to be effective during her lifetime. After the death, media interest increased. A seven-day interim extension was granted on the basis that there was no public interest in the woman or her family being identified. At the instant hearing, an adult daughter applied for a further reporting restrictions order. It was agreed that an order was appropriate, but its duration was disputed. Issues arose as to the court's general approach to granting such orders, particularly regarding the balance to be struck between ECHR art.8 and art.10.
SUMMARY Reporting restrictions orders made by the Court of Protection in serious medical treatment cases could extend beyond the death of the subject of those proceedings. There was no presumption or default position that such orders should end when the subject died. The court considered the general approach which it should take to granting such orders.
HELD Application granted.
HELD (1) The court had jurisdiction to make the order. Reporting restrictions orders in serious medical treatment cases could extend beyond the death of the subject of those proceedings. There was no presumption or default position that such orders should end when the subject died, Meek, Re [2014] EWCOP 1, [2014] C.O.P.L.R. 535 and Press Association v Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals Foundation Trust [2014] EWCOP 6, [2014] C.O.P.L.R. 502 applied (see paras 9.1, 9.11, 98-108, 144-145 of judgment).
HELD (2) The duration of the order would be "until further order of the court". There was no reason to order that reporting restrictions should terminate on the youngest daughter's 18th birthday, as submitted by the respondent media organisations, as the two adult daughters also had valid art.8 rights which were engaged (paras 9.2, 9.14, 110-118, 142-143,167-169, 178-180).
HELD (3) Balancing art.8 and art.10 was a case-sensitive exercise. Care should be taken in transporting comment on the weight of rival factors from one type of case to another, S (A Child) (Identification: Restrictions on Publication), Re [2004] UKHL 47, [2005] 1 A.C. 593 applied and C v Secretary of State for Justice [2016] UKSC 2, [2016] 1 W.L.R. 444 considered (paras 9.3, 43, 69-73).
HELD (4) The first step was to consider whether there was a good reason for a public hearing. That was not an isolated or preliminary stage that, if such a good reason existed, would found an approach that the second stage was addressed on the premise the Court of Protection proceedings were treated in the same way as other proceedings where the default rule was that they were heard in public (para.9.4, 79-80, 90).
HELD (5) The default rule that Court of Protection hearings were held in private represented a general conclusion on how best to administer justice. Neither art.8 nor art.10 took precedence so it would be wrong to approach the default rule as creating a presumption. Rather it was part of the structure for a reasoning process which applied the approach in S (A Child) to a given case (paras 9.5, 80, 91-92).
HELD (6) In most cases, the important safeguards secured by a public hearing could be secured without identifying the people involved. Generally the court should ask (a) whether there were good reasons for a public hearing; (b) if so, whether there should be reporting restrictions; (c) how effective restrictions might be in promoting art 8 rights and how restrictive they would be of art.10 rights; (d) if the hearing was to be in public, what reporting restrictions should be imposed, and if the hearing was to be in private, what documents should be made public (paras 9.6, 9.7, 84-85, 96).
HELD (7) Hearings would almost always be in public because of the benefits of open justice (paras 9.8, 97).
HELD (8) Owing to the rival propositions relating to anonymisation, the court had to distinguish between cases falling within the default position of allowing media access, and cases where media access was restricted. The weight to be given to the general propositions regarding naming, and the court's conclusion about what best promoted the administration of justice in any given case, would vary. They would often be taken into account in the context of (a) the validity of the reasons for the application, and (b) the impact of departing from the general conclusion on what generally promoted the administration of justice. Those reasons and that impact would need to be identified (paras 9.9, 9.10, 78, 95).
HELD (9) In the instant case it should have been clear to anyone with compassion that the focus of the reporting would, and did, add greatly to the distress of the deceased's daughters, one of whom was still at school. Much of the publicity had been precipitated by a wish not only to report the bases on which the court reached its decision, but to attract prurient interest in the deceased's sexual and relationship history. It was obvious that naming or otherwise identifying the deceased would increase the family's distress. Their art.8 rights were engaged, not least because the investigatory jurisdiction of the Court of Protection had invaded their private and family lives. (para.9.13, 29-35, 43, 74-77, 130-143).
JUDGE Charles J
COUNSEL For the applicant: Richard Spearman QC, Vikram Sachdeva QC, Victoria Butler-Cole. For the respondents: Adam Wolanski.





NAME (wl) John v MGN Ltd
CITATION John v MGN Ltd [1997] QB 586
CIT [1997] QB 586
COURT EWCA
TYPE Headnotes
CATEGORY Torts Other Related Subjects: Damages; Defamation; Juries; Measure of Damages
FLAGS Approved
SUMMARY Libel; jury awards
SUMMARY MGN, a newspaper publisher, appealed against a total libel award of GBP 350,000, comprising GBP 75,000 compensatory damages and GBP 275,000 exemplary damages, awarded to J, a musician, in a libel action in respect of an article published in the Sunday Mirror .
HELD allowing the appeal in part and reducing the total award to GBP 75,000, that guidance should be given to juries on appropriate awards to be made in defamation cases as it was offensive to public opinion that sums awarded for damage to reputation often well exceeded those awarded in serious personal injury cases. Although juries should not be reminded of previous jury libel awards, reference to such awards was permissible in the absence of any established frame of reference, Rantzen v Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) Ltd [1994] Q.B. 670 and Broome v Cassell & Co Ltd (No.1) [1972] A.C. 1027 considered. However, a change of practice should be introduced whereby counsel could draw a jury's attention to the maximum conventional award for personal injuries and what would be reasonable in the circumstances, with the proviso that there could be no precise equiparation between an injury such as quadriplegia and injury to reputation. There was no reason why counsel could not make submissions or the judge indicate to the jury the level of award considered appropriate. With regard to assessment of exemplary damages, the jury had to be satisfied that the publisher had no genuine belief in the truth of the article published and that he was motivated by material gain, not merely the publication of a newspaper for profit. An award should never exceed the minimum necessary to satisfy the requirements of punishment and deterrence.
JUDGE Sir Thomas Bingham MR; Neill LJ; Hirst LJ
COUNSEL For MGN: Charles Gray Q.C. and Heather Rogers. For J: Desmond Browne Q.C. and David Parsons.


