--STOP--



Howdy Jeff. Like you, I'm voting remain. 

But some of the arguments to leave are extremely compelling. The essential point on sovereignty, raised very articulately by Boris Johnson, remains unanswered. This is because it's a very good one. If you don't think so, have a glance at S2(1) of the European Communities Act 1972. Then look at the 'operative part' paragraphs in the CJEU's decisions in the cases  of Costa, Marleasing and Factortame III (the 'Spanish Fishermen' case). Then have a look at Scotch Whisky Association C-333/15 from the end of last year, in which the potential curtailment of the completely _hypothetical_ interests of producers of gut-rot French brandy are enough, combined with a mountain they make, clearly in bad faith, of the tiniest misstatements made by the Scottish government the mole-hill of what is clearly no more than a slip of the tongue,


right ofg 
right to free movement  rights of the producers of French gutrot brandy are 


 the  understand the effect of what the court is doing,

 and despite what , and because, after Costa, Walrave and Factortame, there isn't one. My judgment, based mostly on being two days away from an exam in which, apart from passing, the 

where I'm going to have to demonstrate what I  what I learnt from forty hour lecture course in EU law given by an eminent academic,  orty hours of lectures on EU law from Jean Monnet  the arguments to stay are, I reckon, compelling.


Having said that, you must have noticed there's something a little incongruous about the way we think about politics; something marginally -- ever so marginally -- dancing a different dance to 

You 

A basic assumption underlies a hell of   it is that politics is unique in fields of human the single area of human endeavour where the normal assumption that the older you get the wiser you become, and so, the better the decisions you take, gets turned on its head. 

Instead, we make a virtue of ignorance.  Whether on a strict definition of ignorance (e.g., as some measure of the number of things someone knows and in what detail), or on a more substantivist definition taking into account raw cognitive/'processing power' ability, then it's hard to see  